This is Jocko podcast number 13 with Echo Charles and me,
Jocko Willink.
Okay.
This is extracted from US army f m three tack Oh six.one one combined arms
operations in urban terrain.
Following the collapse of the Soviet Union,
the people of Chechnya began to seek full independence.
By 1994 Chesney had fallen into a civil war between pro independence and pro
Russian factions.
In December,
1994 Russia sent 40,000 troops into Chechnya to restore Russian primacy over the
breakaway republic and attack was launched by 6,000 mechanized troops against
the Cheshin capital of Graziani.
Yeah.
Instead of the anticipated light resistance,
Russian forces encountered heavy resistance from the Chechens.
Armed with massive amounts of anti tank weapons,
the Russians will repulsed which shockingly high losses.
It took them another two months of heavy fighting and changing their tactics
before they were able to capture Graziani.
Okay.
Between between January and May,
1995 Russian losses in Chechnya were approximately 2,800 killed,
10,000 wounded and over 500 missing or captured the cash and cash.
The Cheshin casualties were also high,
especially among noncombatants.
This war is a major and cautionary episode in military history,
the large scale lessons of Chechnya lie in these areas.
It showed again the limited effectiveness of heavy weaponry in urban terrain.
And by extension,
the crucial importance of well trained,
well lead,
well equipped and highly motivated infantry.
It proved again that a society judged primitive or chaotic by western standards
can still generate a tremendous fighting spirit and very effective military
discipline.
This is not a new lesson
does,
that's a little introduction to the focus for today.
And that's this Soviet attack on Chechnya,
the breakaway republic.
And it's just urban combat,
the urban combat.
And that's what's,
I found it very fascinating.
And I remember the first time I started to
the first significant moment when I remembered hearing about the lessons learned
from Chechnya.
Cause you know,
you watch it,
you,
you know,
we all watched it.
I was in the military at the time,
you know,
um,
but the first time I remember hearing about the lessons learned was actually
when I was going through officer candidate school in 1998 and for whatever
reason s uh,
one of the Marine Corps drill instructors had had put this series of lessons
learned of the Russian military up on the wall.
And this is something I talk about occasionally is that the,
the,
the lesson that I remembered seeing there was that it was when they,
when they stopped shaving,
when the,
when the Russian troops stopped shaving,
it was like the beginning of the end discipline fell apart,
morale fell apart and everything turned into a disaster.
And there were a bunch of other lessons aren't.
And I've looked for that specific document and I haven't been able to find it.
So I don't know what the specific document was that said that.
But I've found others that are close to that.
But what's interesting is that now,
and this,
this field manuals army field manual that I'm reading from a,
was actually published in 2002.
So we had definitely looked at at this war and it was brutal.
And if you want to go into some dark places,
you can go to some dark places because this is one of the first,
it definitely is one of the first,
where were you had,
you know,
information warfare happening.
Meaning there was propaganda coming out,
homemade propaganda.
You can see it on youtube,
especially from the Cheshin side of just brutal brutal behavior.
Yeah.
And they were doing that purposely to strike fear into the hearts of the Russian
soldiers.
And they,
they,
they were effective in doing that.
They did do that.
Yeah.
It was crazy how they make those videos available to everybody.
They do.
It is,
it is crazy.
So as we dig into this a little bit,
this is still from within the FM three tack one oh six but they're quoting
lessons learned from the world turned upside down.
Military lessons of the Chechen war by Mr Anatole leaving.
And he said it cannot be emphasized too strongly,
therefore that the key to success in urban warfare is good infantry.
And the key to good infantry rather than good weapon tree is a traditional
mixture of training,
leadership qualities and NC shows and junior grade officers and morale implying
a readiness to take casualties.
So this is classic.
Okay,
this is what we,
this is what Ramadi was all about as well.
You know,
good infantry,
which they absolutely had great NCO leadership,
which they absolutely had.
The junior officers were outstanding,
and the morale which,
which he says the morale is a readiness to take casualties.
And it,
you know,
that's one of the things
that no doubt about it,
Colonel Sean McFarlin that was running the brigade,
he had to overcome that fear that many people had,
which was when you push into these enemy controlled territories,
you are going to take casualties.
It is going to happen.
You cannot avoid it.
And that's something that we seals had to deal with as well because seals had
been in,
had been in Iraq for three years at this point and not had any seals killed in
action.
So this idea that we're going to push into this,
a heavy urban fighting
meant to us.
We were gonna,
we were going to take casualties at some point.
The U s back to the book,
the u s will not always have the ability to pick and choose.
It's wars.
And the key reason Chechnya,
is that there will always be a military actions in which it determined infantry
men will remain the greatest asset.
And that is very near and dear to my heart,
knowing that it's not the technology,
it's not the the drones,
it's not the aircraft,
it's the infantry men,
it's the soldier that makes the difference and the leader,
the leaders of those soldiers that make the difference.
Now here was the Marine Corps analysis.
First of all,
strategic lessons.
Military operations alone cannot solve deep seated political problems.
Okay?
Military commanders need clear policy guidance from which they could work
steadily.
And logically,
confusion generated by missing or conflicting policy guidance is made worse by
poorly defined lines of command and control.
So those first two messages,
right there are all about clear guidance and I,
this happens all the time in the business world where you don't see clear
guidance making it all the way down to the front lines to the chain of command.
Okay?
Russian senior command lacked continuity and was plagued by too much senior
leadership involvement at the lower operational level.
Okay?
Lack continuity.
There's gotta be clear message that every leader's got to be basically saying
the same fundamental message.
Okay.
Contrary to initial expectation,
operations were neither of short duration or low cost.
When Russian security operations began achieving results,
the Cheshin started attacking targets within Russia.
It was difficult to unite police and military units into a single cohesive
force.
Distinct tactical advantages accrue to the side with less concern for the safety
of the civilian population.
That is something that we absolutely dealt with in Ramadi.
Again,
it's that the distinct tactical advantage accrue to the side with less concern
for the safety,
the civilian population.
This was,
yeah,
of utmost concern.
Okay.
To every soldier and marine on the ground in Ramadi was trying to protect the
civilian population and of course the al Qaeda and surgeons that we are facing
did not care at all about the civilian population or an either buildings or any
of their,
their lives or children or women or anything else.
Yeah.
Concern about civilian casualties and property destruction declined as
casualties among Russian forces.
Rose.
Okay.
So initially the Russians were also concerned about civilian casualties,
but as they started taking casualties got worse and worse.
Here are some operational lessons
having well-developed military doctrine for urban warfare is not enough in and
of itself.
Got To have that creativity doctrine does not answer everything.
Situation oriented training would have improved Russian military effectiveness
and we're going to talk about that later today,
but situation oriented training and that is when you put yourself in situations
and you make,
people have to think,
okay,
it's not about executing preplan moves.
It's just like in,
in martial arts,
it's not about being able to do a Cada and do a movement.
That's not what it's about.
It's about reacting to another free thinking human being.
And in this case,
a group of free thinking human beings.
How do you react in those situations?
And they're in specific situations as well,
right?
Like they'll situate like in Jujitsu we do situational train.
They'll be like,
okay,
here,
half guard.
Yeah.
If you get on top,
you know,
you start all over.
If you know,
tapped the guy,
whatever,
you start all over in half guard,
start all over,
you know,
and half guard.
Inadequate training in the most basic maneuver and combat skills,
inhibited Russian operations.
So you've got to be trained up in the basics,
no doubt about it.
Urban combat is extremely manpower intensive and produces significant attrition
of men and materiel among the attackers.
Overwhelming fire power can make up for organizational and tactical deficiencies
in the short run if one is willing to disregard collateral damage.
So yeah,
you can just bomb,
bomb the crap out of places and you can make up for your tactical and
organizational problems in the short run if you don't care about a collateral
damage,
you know,
this is w we we,
we don't do that.
We as Americans don't do that.
You care about collateral damage,
the sudden requirement to deploy to Chechnya coupled with the unique supply
problems posed by the weather and the urban environment overwhelmed the already
fragile Russian military logistics system.
Yeah.
And these are just bullet points.
By the way,
if this sounds stilted,
the way I'm reading it,
I'm just reading bullet after bullet.
A lack of high quality intelligence made operations more difficult and dangerous
on the Russian forces.
The geometry and perspectives of urban combat are very different from combat in
the open.
Urban combat is much more vertically oriented.
So in in the desert you do have elevation,
you know you have hills,
mountains,
whatever suits.
So there is some vertically oriented things that you have to deal with.
But in urban combat,
every,
you know,
every foot can be separated by 10 stories,
you know.
And so it is a 360 degree environment.
Not to mention you get subterranean situations,
you have basements,
you have sellers,
you have underground sewers and pipes and things,
uh,
tunnels that go from building to building.
So it's a 360 degree environment for sure.
Fratricide was a serious and continuing problem throughout the campaign in
Chechnya because it was difficult to tell friend from foe.
That's friendly,
fire friendly fire.
And this is obviously in our book
I started off,
I mean the first chapter is about a fratricide that happens.
So obviously we learned this,
you know,
in the,
in the most horrible way and anybody that's been in hardcore urban combat,
and again,
I'm not talking doing an an operation with let's say one unit against a bad guy
in an urban environment.
I'm talking about urban and combat where you have multiple units all over the
place,
right?
Friendly units,
okay.
In buildings,
on roads and they're mixed in.
There's no way he can help with.
They're mixed in with enemy and it becomes very,
very challenging.
Standard Russian military unit configurations were inappropriate for urban
combat.
Yeah.
For going.
Peacetime maintenance is a false economy.
Okay,
so there's something to think about.
Peace time maintenance for good.
When you say,
you know what,
there's nothing going on right now.
We'll just kind of slack off.
You know what?
I don't need to train in the off season.
Right?
I don't need to prepare right now.
Guess what you do?
You do need to prepare right now.
Yeah,
it's,
it's a lie to think you're going to get away with it.
The potential for special forces for urban operations was never realized in
Chechnya.
Well,
we realized it in Ramadi for sure and how to work it.
The nature of cities tends to channel combat operations along narrow lanes of
activity.
That's just a [inaudible] that they were called roads and,
and just like when you're in downtown San Diego in the Gaslamp district,
guess what?
Things are channeled onto long,
narrow,
long,
narrow lanes of activity.
It's called the road.
That's kind of an obvious one.
Tactical lessons.
Okay.
Rigorous communication.
Security is essential even against relatively primitive enemies.
And this is the,
what the Russians found out was that the,
the Chechens,
many of whom spoke Russian,
they,
they would listen to radio calls,
listen to radio commands,
they would,
they would actually get on the radios and give false commands.
So it was,
it was just a nightmare for them.
Now in the,
in America we have very highly sophisticated encryption systems.
So this is really no factor for us.
Knight fighting was the single most difficult operation in Chechnya for infantry
forces.
Again,
this is something that we are very good at.
We being America,
we are awesome at fighting at night.
We have incredible capability on our night vision.
We do it all the time.
And actually that's,
that's worth mentioning.
The reason that we're good at it,
cause we do it all the time.
We trained it all the time.
We do it all the time.
And which is a used to be in living in that way will used to live in that green
world of night vision
tanks and apcs cannot operate in cities without extensive dismounted infantry
support.
Okay.
Down Ramadi,
they absolutely operated
and they operated with phenomenal success.
But they,
but they did have an infantry support
usually very close by,
although they were,
uh,
they did push and do,
do incredible operations on their own as well.
Forces operating in cities need special equipment,
not usually found in the Russian toe,
which is the basically the table of Organization of a company.
Some of the,
the list of normal things that they had,
lightweight ladders were invaluable for assaulting infantry.
And this is all my first deployment to Iraq.
We actually,
uh,
we,
we just built little ladders.
We built little two by four ladders because there's walls all over the place.
So we just,
we just have ladders,
have him hooked on to Humvees when we needed them,
we just pop them off.
I'm over bare was Fairwood two by fours,
right?
Trained snipers were essential,
but in short supply we had plenty of snipers obscure.
UNSW are especially useful in fighting and cities as a smoke grenades and other
ways of blocking vision.
But yeah,
that's one of those things when when I was a kid in the seal teams and we would
learn like,
hey,
you got to throw smoke.
And once you feel the smoke,
you can run away and he kind of,
it almost seems
like a joke almost.
I mean,
right.
That almost sounds funny when I say it like Batman.
Yeah.
It's almost like Batman or,
or James Bond,
you know,
we've got the little smoke button.
It's a freaking real,
it's real.
Like you throw that smoke out,
you let that smoke start to pour out and then all of a sudden you can get out of
there and it's again,
it's one of those things that
it almost seems like a joke when you first hear about it.
When you're a kid you're like,
wait,
really?
That's a real thing.
Recovering damaged armored vehicles is especially difficult in cities.
We absolutely learned to that.
The insurgence took out dozens of tanks and Bradley Fighting Vehicles and
Humvees and it was always very difficult for the engineers to get in there and
get those things out of there.
A failure of small unit leadership,
especially at the NCO level,
was a primary cause of Russian tactical failures in Grozny.
So when you hear me say leadership is the most important thing on the
battlefield,
that is what I am talking about.
That is exactly what I am talking about.
And it's the same thing in businesses.
It's the same thing in teams.
And it's the same thing in life.
When we talk about leadership,
we're not just talking about the overall person in charge.
We're talking about leadership at every level.
Yeah.
Both sides employed commercial off the shelf technologies for military purposes
be ready for that.
You know,
in,
in Ramadi,
they,
the enemy absolutely huge.
Know a little Motorola walkie talkies.
They had Motorola base station set up.
I mean they were,
they were using it.
Hmm.
Tactical Communications proved very difficult and Graziani again,
you can't change the laws of physics.
And radio waves cannot punch through more than,
you know,
a couple,
two,
three buildings.
So once you get a couple,
two or three buildings away,
you're not going to be able to talk to the other units,
you know,
maybe four or five buildings.
And the only way to do it is get on the rooftops.
And so,
you know,
I was almost always on a rooftop cause I was know my main role was usually to
make communications with a various troops that were out there,
army and my guys.
And so I was almost always on a rooftop with a big old antenna sticking off my
shoulder.
Okay.
And that's when you know,
when one of the guys needed to talk to me,
they knew to go to the rooftop and they'd catch me.
Okay.
The cabs of supply trucks must be armored,
no doubt about that.
Bunker busting weapons are invaluable for urban and combat.
This is something that we used a ton of.
Who is the Carl Gustaf 84 millimeter?
Yeah.
Okay.
Big Thunder
helicopters are not well suited for urban combat.
Okay.
And there's no doubt about that one.
Again,
in Ramadi,
we found that
anytime helicopters came into Ramadi,
they received so much small arms fire that they left immediately.
It was just too hot for them to go into these situations.
When a helicopter comes in,
what does it take to take down a helicopter?
The UK?
I mean,
you could take one round,
right?
It's almost like a human body.
You know,
there's some,
some something you hitting the right spot in the right spot.
You could,
you could take it out.
But um,
so it's really hard to put an absolute on that.
But you know,
generally they can take,
they can take some punishment and especially the Apaches which are,
you know,
pretty well armored,
but they're not well armored enough to get in there and do what they would want
to do.
Right.
So they end up just taking so many rounds that they leave.
They couldn't,
they couldn't stay.
Yeah.
Like if you hit in that loop,
that that rear propeller,
yeah,
maybe you hit it and the weak spot,
there's gonna be issues,
which I won't talk about.
All right.
Now we,
that was the Marine Corps analysis,
and again,
this is all from the same manual,
but I'm going to,
I'm going to go into date.
So they covered what the corps analysis had and now this is the US army infantry
school analysis is Russian army lessons learned from the battle of Grazi.
You need to culturally Orient your forces so you don't end up being your own
worst enemy.
Simply out of cultural in ignorance.
Many times Russian soldiers made see serious cultural errors in dealing with the
Cheshin civilians once insulted or mistreated the Chechens became active
fighters or at least supported the active fighters.
Russians admit they underestimated,
they have the effect of religion on the conflict.
So you got to know your enemy and you got to know your friends.
And this is something that they definitely,
uh,
they definitely make that important in the u s military that,
you know,
you've got to understand the local culture.
And there was a true hero named Travis Patrick one who we will have to do a show
on at some point,
but Dravis Patrick Quinn was with us over in Iraq in Ramadi,
and he was just incredibly smart guy and a former SF guy.
He was,
then he became a captain in the army and he spoke Arabic and
he's the guy really that started saying,
look,
if this is what we gotta do to make friends with these locals.
And he ended up producing this,
this actually pretty famous PowerPoint brief that just had a bunch of stick
figures of,
Hey,
this is the local guy,
this is what he sees you as,
this is what you see him as,
but this is what he really is and this is what you know.
And it was a great,
uh,
great,
document,
a very simple document,
brilliant in its simplicity in the way it explained and it,
and it ended up being circulated all over the place.
And that was written by a guy named Travis Patrick Ward who's just again,
hilarious guy,
very nice guy,
and really had a vision of and a full understanding of the Arabic culture,
the tribal culture,
the shakes that were there in Ramadi.
And he did an amazing job moving that whole
scene and that whole piece of the battle.
He did an amazing job moving us forward and making sure that we were culturally
oriented to understand the locals.
And
unfortunately after we left her madi and,
and they were still there,
Captain Patrick when Patrick,
when Travis Patrick and was in a vehicle,
I think it was heading south on a road called sunset and they hit an IED and he
was killed in action and it was a tragic loss of an incredible,
not only incredible soldier but just an incredible human.
Someday we'll uh,
we'll go into some more depth about,
about Travis.
Patrick.
Great.
Cause he really had a huge impact.
Next bullet point you need is some way of sorting out combatants from
noncombatants.
The Russians were forced to resort to searching the pockets of civilians for
military equipment and to sniffing them for the smell of gunpowder and gun oil.
This is crude and not very reliable.
Train dogs were used to tack the smell of gunpowder explosives,
but we're not always effective.
Nevertheless,
specially trained dogs are probably the best way to determine if a person has
been using explosives or firing a weapon.
Recently what was good for us was,
you know,
working alongside the Iraqi soldiers.
They could tell,
they could tell where people were from,
they could tell where their accent was from.
They could tell with a couple of questions.
Who could tell you're the Iraqi soldiers when we went in to speak to some random
Iraqi civilians.
Yeah.
They could,
they could tell.
I wouldn't be able to tell in a million years.
Right.
Just like if you took an Iraqi and transplanted,
I'm hearing and putting them in a room with a guy from New Jersey and a guy from
southern California and a guy from Georgia,
they wouldn't be able to tell where any of these people will find it,
but any American could talk to any of those three people immediately know where
they were.
Gotcha.
So we use the Iraqi soldiers to help us with that and are also our interpreters.
We had,
you know,
uh,
interpreters that had,
were fluent in language and generally came from either Iraq or some other Arabic
speaking country.
And so they had the same knowledge and they could do the same thing.
Hmm.
The psychological impact of high intensity urban combat is so intense units
should maintain a large reserve that will allow them to rotate units in and out
of combat.
If a commander does this,
he can preserve a unit for a long time.
If he doesn't,
once it gets used up,
it cannot be rebuilt.
Yeah,
so that statement about the psychological impact of high intensity urban combat,
and there's so many little things that make this true.
You know,
I already talked about the 360 degree threat.
There's the Iud,
there's the civilian populace,
there's the close inviting,
there's all these things that make urban combat the most intense kind of combat
psychologically,
and you have to be careful with your troops to make sure that you give them
enough time out of the fight that they can maintain a long deployment in that
sort of intensity
and the Russians did not always do a very good job of that.
Okay,
next bullet.
Training and discipline are paramount.
You can accomplish nothing without them.
You may need to do the training in the combat zone.
Discipline must be demanded once it begins to slip.
The results are disastrous.
That is
something I believe in across the board.
I think you mentioned that before too,
by the way.
I may have mentioned that a few times and there it is.
Again,
training and discipline are paramount.
Discipline must be demanded,
one to begins to slip.
The results are disastrous.
You have to hold the line on the discipline you have to.
The Russians were surprised and embarrassed at the degree to which the Chechens
exploited the use of cell phones.
Motorola radios,
improvised TV stations,
lightweight video cameras,
and the Internet to when the information war,
the Russians admitted that they lost control of the information coming out of
Grazi early in the operation and never regained it.
As expected.
The Russians reiterated the need for large numbers of trained infantry men.
They said that some tasks such as conducting a log pack,
that's logistics operations could only be conducted by infantry men.
The logistical unit soldiers were hopelessly inept at basic military skills such
as perimeter defense,
establishing security,
Overwatch and so forth,
and their bet thereby felt easy prey to the Chechens.
So that's something that our troops in America have
have really done an outstanding job of adapting to the logistics,
support people being combat ready.
Because every time you're,
you know,
if you're,
if you're a supply guy in the army and you got to bring whatever it is,
water,
food,
ammunition from Baghdad to Ramadi.
Mm hmm.
That means you're doing a combat patrol.
That means you,
you could likely get attacked.
And so America did a really good job of getting their folks trained up to run
these convoys.
And you know,
the logistics teams that supplied the war fighters,
the frontline troops,
they came under all kinds of attacks and did an outstanding job.
So all you folks that are listening that were running those logistics Kahn
voice,
thank you.
And you did an outstanding job.
And I know there's huge risk every time you rolled out the front gate.
Next bullet,
they found that boundaries between units were still tactical weak points,
but that it wasn't just horizontal battery boundaries that they had to worry
about.
In some cases the [inaudible] held the third floor and above,
while the Russians held the first two floors.
And sometimes the roof,
if a unit holding the second floor evacuated parts of it without telling the
unit on the ground floor,
the Chechens would move troops in an attack the ground four unit through the
ceiling.
Often this resulted in fratricide is the ground floor to unit responded with
uncontrolled fire through all of the ceilings,
including the ones below.
That section of the building still occupied by the Russians and tire battles
were fought through floors,
ceilings,
and walls without visual contact.
That's gotta be scary,
right?
Yeah.
Ambushes were common.
Sometimes they actually had three tiers.
Chechens would be underground on the ground for and on the roof.
Each group had a different task in the ambush.
The most common response by the Chechens to the increasingly powerful Russian
indirect,
Ariel indirect and Ariel firepower was hugging the Russian unit.
The hugging tactics because the Russians,
sorry if the hugging tactic,
because the Russians to cease artillery and air fires,
it became a man to man fight and the Chechens we're well equipped to win it if
they didn't cease the supporting fires.
The Russian units suffered just as much as the Cheshin fighters did.
Sometimes even more and the morale effect was much worse on the Russians.
So there's,
I mean it's very simple.
Go.
If the,
if the enemy is going to use or if the Russians are going to use big bombs and
big artillery and big bombs from the sky to to defeat us,
we'll just get so close in.
We'll just close the distance and be so close that if you want to drop bombs,
you're going to kill your own people.
Both
the physical and mental health of the Russian units began to decline almost
immediately upon initiation of high intensity combat.
In less than a month,
almost 20% of the Russian soldiers were suffering from viral hepatitis,
which is a very serious depilling debilitating with slow recovery.
Most had chronic diarrhea and upper respiratory infections that turned to
pneumonia easily.
This was blamed on the breakdown of logistical support.
That meant units had to drink contaminated water
unit.
Sanitary discipline broke down almost completely.
So that discipline,
like I said,
it starts with the shaving and the next thing you don't,
you're not boiling your water.
The next thing you know you're sick and the next thing you know you're crapping
all over the place and next thing you know other people,
you're making other people sick and it starts with the discipline.
Okay.
According to a survey of over 1300 troops is a Russian troops made immediately
after the fighting,
about 72% had some sort of psychological disorder.
Almost 75% had an exaggerated startle response that that's like when there's a
loud noise in your shutter.
From It,
about 75% had an exaggerated startle response.
28% had what was described as neuro emotional and almost 10% had acute emotional
reactions.
The Russians recommended to psycho physiologists,
one psychopharmacologists,
one psychiatrist and one medical psychologist at each u s Corp sized unit.
That's a huge recommendation from mental health.
Although their experience in Afghanistan prepared them somewhat for the physical
health problems.
They were not prepared for this level of mental health treatment.
Many permanent combat stress casualties resulted from soldiers not being
provided proper immediate treatment.
Yeah.
Again,
this boils down to how harsh that urban combat is and they were not ready for
it.
They will not ready for the psychological damage that that urban combat does
to the soldier's mind.
How it gets in the head and you've got the startle response and the emotional
acute reactions.
It's a nightmare.
That acute emotional reactions,
that's like,
like what the break down,
breaking down,
breaking down thing.
Chechens afraid of tanks or BMPS and BNP is like a Bradley fighting vehicle.
It's basically an armored personnel character carrier for the most part with a
big gun on top.
They assigned groups of RPG gunners to fire volleys at the lead and trail
vehicles.
Once these were destroyed,
others were picked off one by one.
Oh,
this is battle Grazi some facts.
The Russian forces oss 20 of 26 tanks 102 have 120 bmps in the first three days
of fighting.
Yeah.
So imagine you've got a convoy of 12 vehicles with a tank in the front of the
tank in the back and the Chechens take out the front and back.
So now what?
Now guess what,
your stock and then they just sit there and pick off the rest of the vehicles.
Ducks,
Chet.
This is also
okay.
Important.
Cheshin chose firing positions high enough or low enough to stay out of the
fields of fire of the tank and BMP weapons.
So you know the,
the angle of fire can only go so high and so low.
So they just stayed out of those two angles.
Russian conscript,
infantry sometimes refuse to dismount and often died in their BMP without ever
firing a shot.
Okay,
so this is a,
this is a nightmare.
Your vehicle gets hit and if you know anything,
when your vehicle gets hit or like your convoy gets hit,
get out.
In other words,
you have to vehicle can't move,
right because it's trapped by other vehicles are trapped by the road or it's
trapped,
whatever.
Get out of the vehicle,
get out of the vehicle and take down a building,
get out of the vehicle and move to cover.
Get Out,
but get out of the vehicle,
the vehicles,
just a bullet magnet at that point and an RPG magnet.
So just get out of their Russian elite infantry did much better but didn't
coordinate well with armored vehicles initially.
So I can tell you that we coordinated with the armored vehicles beautifully and
we loved them.
We loved the U s army armor that we work with,
absolutely loved them and we coordinated with them and we worked together with
them in a beautiful manner.
Chechens were brutish,
especially with prisoners.
Some reports say the Russians were no better,
but most say that the Chechens were the worst of the two sides.
Whoever was at fault,
the battle degenerated quickly to one of no quarter asked none given,
okay,
Russian wounded and dead were hung upside down in the windows have defended
gestion positions.
Russians had to shoot at the bodies to engage the Chechens.
Russian prisoners were decapitated and at night their heads were placed on
stakes beside the roads leading into the city over which Russian replacements
and reinforcements had to travel.
So you know,
you don't think of that in this day and age.
That's something you hear you read about in the history books,
you remember from the history books.
But there it is.
And this is 1994,
1995,
1996 heads on stakes,
both Russian and Cheshin dead or routinely booby trapped.
The Russians were not surprised by the ferocity and brutality of the Chechens,
but they were surprised by the sophistication of the Cheshin you use of booby
traps and minds,
Chechens mind and booby trapped.
Everything showing excellent insight into the actions and reactions of the
average Russian soldier.
Mine and booby trap awareness was hard to maintain and it's,
as you look at this more,
I mean they,
they booby trapped.
Anything that WWE,
they talk about,
um,
how they showed insight into the actions and reactions.
The average Russian soldier,
they knew what would attract them.
They knew what they couldn't keep their hands off of and that's what they'd
booby trap some old shiny objects,
a little something that looked expensive or something that looked worthwhile.
It was booby trapped.
Now that kind of wraps up that first book,
but I pulled out some other little articles that I thought had some good
information.
This one,
here's Russian tactical lessons learned from fighting Cheshin separatists by
Timothy L.
Thomas.
This section
with regard to general ambush guidance.
Kozloff offered the following.
Okay.
First and foremost,
mobilize your will knowledge and experience.
No matter how difficult this may be,
in order to reestablish command and control,
repost the enemy attack,
seize the initiative and report the situation
that that is an,
that is a powerful statement and it's a powerful statement on how to react to
any situation.
First and foremost,
mobilize your will.
Hmm.
I love envisioning the will as like a military unit.
First and foremost,
mobilize your will.
Bring it to bear.
Wake up.
We'll it's time to get it on.
Yeah.
In college and football,
they'd say,
well,
I'm,
I heard this other places do,
but they'd say,
buckle up in cart.
Your grill can,
what was it?
Buckle up and guard your grill.
Yeah.
So it's like,
you know,
get ready to,
to go
mobilize your will,
your knowledge and experience,
no matter how difficult this Ma,
maybe in order to reestablish command and control.
So you've lost it.
It's saying mobilize your will.
Reestablish Command and control Rep.
Polst the enemy.
Attacked,
seize the initiative and report the situation.
Has some damn good advice.
Some damn good advice.
Moral psychological support also was a training area for improvement of
particular concern.
Here we're the mood swings that were observed among Russian servicemen during
combat.
So you seen these drastic mood swings and and so much of this was psychological
on the Russians and Russians are hard people.
Yeah.
Cause I mean we're not,
we're not talking about soft people.
These are Russians.
I mean Russians are hard people.
The end result of such training would be to improve the servicemen,
his fighting spirit.
Yeah.
Use of common sense and rationale to overcome confusion,
the ability to act Bowlby actively and decisively in battle and the ability to
achieve one's assigned goal.
Again,
this is a talking about training the mind to think,
do,
use common sentence,
what you want to do with all your people.
I don't care what business you're in,
whether you're in a war,
whether you're in business,
whether you're in some kind of team.
Yeah.
Train the mind to use common sense.
Drain the mind for the ability to act boldly and decisively.
Got to train the mind.
You've got to free your mind.
Now,
that same article pulled out Russian lesson learned from Spitz knots,
Gru reconnaissance point of view,
and the authors were k nicotine and s Kozloff.
They called this one section the commandments for servicemen and Chechnya,
and what they actually were was cultural tips on cultural sensitivities for
Russian soldiers and they are as falls,
and when I read through these,
this is a directive on how to treat other human beings that you're dealing with
Cheshin,
Russian,
American,
subordinate,
superior,
doesn't matter.
What was the title of that?
Again,
tips on cultural sensitivities for Russian soldiers.
One,
always maintain your authority among the local populace.
That sessions are very critical of people who try to create a false authority
for themselves.
A sole cold,
patronizing attitude towards others usually afflicts those who cannot gain
authority through other means.
We talk about this all the time.
You don't run around throwing your rank out,
make you look like a jackass.
Okay,
next,
avoid unwarranted compensation as an uninformed unlawful requisitions of food
and property.
That one makes pretty easy sense.
Don't steal from people.
Next one,
be fair.
Every local inhabit.
It must be dealt with firmly but fairly injustice gives rise to negative
attitude in any person.
So be fair.
Reward a Cheshin who performs as a ta assigned task.
Well to accomplish a task that you need to get accomplished,
choose the most authoritative person among the local inhabitants and get him to
carry out the task.
If he does the job right and does it quickly,
you should reward the elder by giving him additional authority and by giving
them some kind of gift.
Reward your people when they do a good job.
It's all we're saying here
when dealing with Cheshin,
this display a calm,
a display,
a sense of calm and self worth,
you will achieve more through this then through screaming obscenity.
Absurdities never beat a Cheshire
and it goes on to say Chechens are a proud people with a very intense sense of
pride in self worth.
Therefore you will achieve nothing by humiliating them,
by screaming at them and by abusing them you will only in bitter them,
right?
This
is how you treat other people.
And it goes on to say,
even in casual conversation,
do not give orders and do not use profanity that you might normally use as
interjection.
I interjections
so this idea of yelling and screaming and you think you're going to,
people will do what you want them to do,
doesn't work.
Next,
respect.
[inaudible] women,
girls,
old men and children as if they were Russians.
Always remember that Chechens respect manly qualities therefore never permit any
disrespect of vulgarity with regard to their women.
Never allow yourself to curse at defenseless people in revenge for the outrages
of militants against Russian women,
old men and children.
So keep yourself in check and made sure you're not blaming people for something
that somebody else did.
Studying.
Be respectful of national traditions.
The more you know about the Chechens national traditions,
the more you will understand their behavior.
That means you will be able to predict their actions at the same time.
A person that respects the local traditions will be respected himself.
Gee,
what a novel idea.
Know who you're dealing with.
Respect what they do.
Always remember that the above mentioned commandments apply to the fullest
extent possible to local inhabitance and they do not apply at all to the
militants.
Never forget you are in a region where there are insurgents against whom you are
at war.
Therefore you can never be certain that the person with whom you are speaking is
not helping the militants
under conditions of guerrilla warfare is better to turn down an invitation into
someone's home and risk offending the host than it is to take advantage of is
hospitality and ending up being an easy catch for insurgents.
Again,
I think those were just like rules on how to treat other human beings in the
world and be successful.
Now we get to a,
uh,
another little excerpt that I found and this is from
sole dot.
Who Daci,
which is a basically to magazine.
It's almost like a soldier of Fortune magazine.
Yeah.
And he,
these are where some of the,
some of the rules for a soldier and a zone of armed conflict
fighters can be anywhere posing as peaceful citizens in the daytime and changing
into killers at night.
Don't accept someone's friendly just because they speak Russian and wear
camouflage.
Close is perhaps my favorite one right here.
You don't get a second chance in war time.
Never lose the feeling of danger or of the strength of the spirit of the Russian
soldier.
Never leave a base without the commanders permission in the field.
Never touch bright or expensive objects as they may be mind.
Okay.
In the mountains,
whoever is higher is stronger.
Take the high ground or the high ground is going to take you.
Pay attention to the flanks.
Has the basic maneuver of the insurgence is to get around your back and envelop
your force.
Always check your flanks.
I'm going to burn through some of these now.
These are tactical observations from the Graziani combat experience by Brett.
See Jenkinson,
who is a major in the U s army.
He wrote a really good article worth checking out Google it,
but I broke down some of these
Cheshin lessons learned.
This is from the Cheshin side.
Hit and run tactics confused.
The Russian units targeting Russian radio operators destroyed Russian command
and control small units provided good mobility and weren't effective.
Basic maneuver unit
hugging,
which we already talked about,
which was staying 50 to 250 meters of the enemy.
It was the most effective way to avoid enemy artillery,
mortars or close air support.
Synchronize the ambushes confused the enemy to the point that he did not know
where to shoot back as a result,
Russian.
Okay.
Units would start firefights between themselves.
He's throwing the lead and train vehicles and then each vehicle in between could
easily isolate Russian armored columns.
Shooting enemy soldiers in the legs caused snipers to engage other soldiers
trying to evacuate the wounded.
Okay.
And on leadership,
a loosely organized unit that allowed greater freedom of action was effective to
defend Graziani.
Little bit of freedom on the battlefield goes a long way.
Now the Russian lessons learned training and preparation of the most important
thing in winning battles.
Urban combat training must be longer than days or weeks to be effective.
Yeah.
Urban combat must be tailored to fit the enemy's situation.
Okay.
Task organizing to small squad sized combined to salt groups worked better than
large units.
Okay.
Russians underestimated the Cheshin will to fight
lessons learned from successful tactics should be integrated into fall on
missions to be successful.
One must adapt quicker than the enemy.
Okay.
For the leadership perspective,
again,
this is the Russians adapted lessons learned from previous urban battles provide
proved invaluable.
The greatest challenge to leadership was maintaining morale.
High casualty rates destroyed the already low morale of combat units.
Another challenge to morale was the Russian soldiers.
Fear of enemy mistreatment if captured,
and this is an important one of failure to justify the nature of Russian
military intervention in Chechnya resulted in low morale,
so the troops on the ground not knowing and not understanding why they were
there and not understanding the strategic and important are the vision,
hurt their morale.
Big Time.
Now I have a couple excerpts here from,
this is from an article that was in the La Times January 13th,
1995 by Sony F Ron.
Okay.
Captured Russian soldiers paint bleak picture of Cheshin conditions.
So this is Grazia Graziani,
Russia,
Russian troop morale is so low.
Conditions are so poor in losses are so heavy that the rush attempt to take Razi
is floundering to Russian soldiers.
Captured in the capital of the breakaway.
Republic of Chechnya said Thursday the soldiers are against this war.
And so our commanders
said Alexia 20 year old junior sergeant was caught while trying to steal food
from an empty house and grounds me after you're gone.
Five days without a say solid meal,
we are forced to fight.
The two soldiers said Russian positions had frequently been bombed by Russian
war planes.
Many soldiers had been killed by friendly fire from the Russian side and
constant vehicle breakdowns made it impossible for them to pick up their dead
and wounded.
And this is I,
I haven't found the book yet and I'm sure I will.
The book that takes you into the battle onto the ground,
cause I've been talking to all the strategic stuff and generally I don't like to
do that.
I want to hear from the person on the ground
and this is where you start to get it.
You start to see what the Russians,
what the frontline troopers were thinking and what it was like for them.
And here you had him saying that many soldiers had been killed by friendly fire
from the Russian side.
Constant vehicle breakdowns made it impossible for them to pick up their dead
and wounded
in a company that had a hundred men.
Now they're only 50 left in our battalion.
Out of 350 men,
over 250 had been killed.
The soldiers accounts indicate that the new official figures putting the Russian
military death toll at 394 soldiers are vastly understated.
Cheshin sources put the Russian casualties at about 3000 dead.
These Russians are worse than fascists.
Said Gregory a smear NOFX 50 who's beloved.
Cherry tree was decapitated by the rocket for young guys have been killed in our
street.
They weren't fighters,
they weren't against anyone.
I apologize for what Russia is doing here.
Smirnoff said,
I'm embarrassed by my country in front of the whole world.
A month after President Boris Yeltsin promise the Russian public that law and
order would be restored and Chechnya and that the illegal armed formations in
Grozny would quickly be disarmed.
It was unclear whether Russian forces could soon breakthrough the fierce cheshin
resistance.
I don't think they can take the city said one Cheshin fighter,
they can destroy it but they can't capture it.
The two Russian prisoners who had entered Grazia on December 20th looked
exhausted,
filthy and frightened.
If their condition is typical of the rest of the enemy.
It is not surprising that the Russians have not yet attempted another all out of
infantry assault on Graziani.
Frankly,
there is no discipline,
no anything in the military.
Now the prisoner said the soldiers are weakened.
They haven't washed for a long time.
They are hungry and unshaven.
Even a soldier when he wants to describe how bad things have gotten,
he says that the soldiers are dirty,
hungry,
and unshaven.
There were times where more of us were getting killed by our own people than by
the Chechens.
We don't even have time to pick up our dead.
Just no time.
We're eating,
fighting the Cheshin or our own air force is bombing us.
A prisoner added that they'd been ordered to kill everybody from kids to old
people,
not just [inaudible] but also Russians.
This is a nightmare.
The two soldiers said they went into a house,
northeast Grazi neighborhood to look for food because they hadn't had a proper
meal for five days.
They've been surviving on dry rations that were never enough and were delivered
to their posh positions irregularly.
As the prisoner spoke,
Cheshin fighters gathered around them to listen upon hearing.
The Russians admit that they had broken into the house.
One man shouted angrily looters.
Okay,
oh we wanted to have something to eat.
Modern the prisoner
now.
Okay,
we got to remember we've got up,
you know,
this is the,
this is the Soviet Union.
This is Russia.
So they have their own media and I found this article
and I'm,
I shouldn't be laughing cause it's,
it's,
it's horrible.
But this is the Moscow Times talking about the other story of Grosse knee.
The city of Grazia is cold and dirty.
Again,
this is some kind of a state approved message.
There is no water,
no electricity at night.
The streets are illuminated only by distant fires sparked by Russian shelling
and the occasional flares here is full of sound,
constantly thumping of artillery shells,
the screams of Grad missiles and crackle of machine gun fire.
The only source of heat and the burned out basements of draws near from homemade
furnaces that Russian soldiers at fashion from bricks of destroyed buildings at
night.
Officers and soldiers huddle around them,
their faces dirtied and covered with sweat since they are really have water with
which to wash it and almost looks like they are wearing the kind of camouflage
paint that is issued to soldiers in western armies.
These men are by and large normal decent to people.
They believe that they are doing their duty in Chechnya.
That's a little bit contrary to what we just heard from the prisoners.
So of course now the prisoners,
those guys are in a dress situation too cause there might get their heads
chopped off at any moment.
So they're probably making the case the best they can that,
hey,
you know,
we're not in supported Russia.
They're just trying to stay alive.
They insist the back to the article.
They insist they do not intentionally attack peaceful civilians.
Butter instead waging battle against an organizing pitiless enemy,
the conscripts who are risking their lives and Chechnya might as well be
considered volunteers.
Okay,
this is the paper,
you know,
saying that these poor guys that are fighting,
they should be considered volunteers even though they're con scripts that are
being forced to fight there.
They might as well be considered volunteers.
Russia is not declared a war or martial law,
so nothing threatens deserters except the moral condemnation of the comrades
they leave behind.
The army's morale has been steadily improving as it becomes more experienced in
street fighting.
Again,
there's countless documented cases of the morale completely falling apart and
being one of the premier causes of a loss of the battle.
It's casualty rate is falling and is able to inflict increasing punishment on
the Cheshin fighters.
The military is confident of victory among the soldiers.
You hear a different about the war than what you read in Moscow.
Many reports in the media about Chechnya campaign or obviously biased against
the military.
Some may even be censored.
When I was in Chesney on January 22nd,
a crew from Russian television was in Graziani shooting report for the evening
news program.
The report included graphic footage of the bodies of Russian soldiers who had
been mutilated by the Chechens.
However,
the host of the program refuse to error without even seeing it.
Of course,
only a fraction of the Russian army is fighting in Chechnya,
but they'd been sent here there from virtually every military district in the
country.
Eventually they will return to their bases and tell their stories to the rest of
their comrades in arms and those soldiers will put a lot more stock and what the
Cheshin Chechnya veterans have to say than they will at any press reports or
human rights activists.
So there's the,
uh,
the official Russian version.
Brutal.
In your experience,
does that ever happen here?
Like look,
your stuff in the media and you're like,
Dang,
that's,
that's not,
oh yeah,
it happens.
It definitely happens here.
There's no doubt about that.
Um,
the way that the media portrays things is,
is very wrong.
You know,
often very wrong.
I think one of the classics that I've been telling lately are talking about
lately is that they,
they never portray the Iraqi people as normal human beings that just want to
live normal lives.
They never portray the Iraqi people like that
when that's what they are.
The vast majority of Iraqi people are normal people that want to have a job,
raise their kids,
let their kids go to school,
improve their lives,
do better.
That's what the vast majority of Iraqi people want.
But you know,
when,
when's the last time you saw an American family on the news that was going to
the store to go grocery shopping and then come home and do some yard work in the
afternoon?
Right?
No,
they don't show that because it's not news.
And it's the same thing in Iraq.
They don't show that.
Yeah.
So we always get this impression that you know that everyone in Iraq is some
kind of militant or they're just tired of us being,
yeah,
that's not true.
Not True at all.
Interested.
So that's one of the biggest points I can think of where the media comm just to,
they just get it wrong.
They just get it wrong and it really leaves people in America thinking will of
God,
why are we there?
It's so crazy that we would do we,
you know why they don't want us there?
No,
actually they do want us there.
But you don't show those people.
You show the protesters because that's news.
It's not news
to interview someone that says,
yeah it's great having the Americans here.
Hopefully they can maintain the peace.
That's not news.
Yeah.
Isn't that crazy how it,
sure.
That's not news.
And that kind of makes sense.
You know,
what are you,
why would you report on an American family?
You just,
you know,
the dad went to work.
You want to report on that,
cause that's not news.
So that makes sense.
But the fact that you're not reporting everyday stuff is essentially changing
the,
the accurate message into a message that's inaccurate,
then that's something,
you know.
Yeah,
it is.
It is.
It's uh,
it's horrible.
It's horrible to see.
This is just another little section.
The Russian counterinsurgency operation in Chechnya,
part one,
a winning the battle,
losing the war by Matthew in
Genco RPG and sniper fire focused on unexposed Russian troops.
Small groups of 10 to 20 Cheshin fighters moved in and out of buildings and the
surrounding mountains to engage heavily armed and armored Russian troops.
The Cheshin teams would attack and shifts some attacking while the others
rested.
So that a force of no more than 50 held entire battalions at bay bottleneck in
the narrow streets and cities or the trefle tremor or the treacherous deaf lays
of the mountains,
chess and utilization of information and space and they're highly sophisticated
networking allowed them a tremendous advantage in terms of physical combat and
even more important advantage in terms of psychological impact on their enemy
rather than a group of Ragtag and surgeon fighters fueled by hatred and national
fanaticism that Cheshin fighters were highly trained,
disciplined,
well equipped and knowledgeable of the terrain.
Okay.
From the individual up through the army level,
the Chechens held the advantage in all but air power and fire support.
And we already talked about how they overcame that.
The Cheshin fighters proved better,
trained,
equipped,
technically skilled and fed and demonstrated remarkably higher morale and
motivation in addition to an intimate knowledge of the hazardous terrain.
So it's inquiry,
it's just incredible how over and over again they point out on both sides how
big of a factor Miralis.
So if you're in a leadership position,
whether you're working with a team,
whether you're working with a company,
with your Turkey,
working,
uh,
with a business,
morale is so important and you have to pay attention to it.
Yeah.
It seems that kind of added glance or something.
It seems like morale is kind of this extra thing,
you know?
Oh,
what,
you don't feel good when you know,
business is business.
You know,
you don't feel good about it,
but man,
that's,
that's kind of the fuel,
you know,
you don't have the fuel,
it's quite,
and do it.
Yeah.
I wouldn't say it's a fuel.
I'd say it's the fire.
You Go.
Right,
right.
Yeah.
Throughout the first Chechen war fighters,
many
of them,
former Soviet soldiers,
we've combat experience in Afghanistan,
dug into the hills and a defensive and fierce war of attrition with the Russian
troops,
not unlike their former after any counterparts,
although both sides engage in acts of brutality to weaken the enemy's a resolve
to fight Cheshin fighters far out did their Russian counterparts in these
grizzly psychological tactics.
They hung Russian wounded,
upside down,
wounded and dead upside down in the windows of defensive positions,
for example,
forcing the Russians to fire at their combat comrades in order to engage the
rebels.
Clearly that's the second time we've talked about that.
Clearly that had a huge impact.
I can't even imagine what that does to you psychologically when you want to
shoot at the enemy and you got to shoot at one a,
your brothers who's either wounded,
I mean he might be dead bees possibly just wounded and either ways.
He's right there.
You got to shoot.
Yeah.
It's the both Russian and Cheshin dead were routinely booby trapped by the
Chechens who showed sophisticated insight.
Yeah.
Into the likely actions,
reactions of the average Russian soldiers.
We already talked about that.
Okay.
In addition,
Cheshin fighters use dirty tactics collectively learned from dozens of
asymmetrical gorilla conflicts before,
such as instructing snipers to aim for the legs of Russian troops injuring but
not in capacitating them,
and then shooting free range at the subsequent rescue parties that we're sure to
come.
Yeah.
Some snipers aimed specifically at the groin dealing a crippling and humiliating
wound and a humility humiliating wound that resulted in a slow,
painful death.
And we,
we experienced this in Iraq to where in part of it was like rumor mill are as
people would say,
Oh man,
these,
cause there was a,
I remember in Falucia there was a sniper that shots couple guys and the in the
groin and then you know,
one person got shot in the groin and in Ramadi and I just remember everyone,
if they could all their goal,
the though this is what they need,
psychological,
it's a psychological attack.
Chechens routinely dressed in Russian uniforms to gain access to bases and used
these opportunities to launch surprise attacks from behind enemy lines.
Each Cheshin took seriously the notion that the center of grabbing the war was
no longer the enemy's army,
but rather the enemy's people tactics were devised to attack the psyche of the
Russians,
aimed at creating a constant level,
high level of psychological stress on the Russian servicemen to undermine their
morale.
So the Chechens,
we're attacking the morale,
attacking them,
doing things that were attacking them psychologically
hardened by United sense of purpose.
In driving out the invader,
the Cheshin troops terrified and terrorize that Russian troops slowly bleeding
out their morale and willingness to fight the Russian troops.
Many still in their teams were woefully unprepared at undertrained in
comparison.
The result of such a disparity and morale and military expectations had tragic
consequences.
Yeah.
According to one ration participant,
the men on the ground shaking and angered by their losses were just taking it
out on anyone.
They found there was revenge in the air for those comrades who had been killed
and now you end up with so the Russian troops get so frustrated,
they're so psychologically damaged that there's going out and taking it out on
the local Cheshin,
which are some of these are Russian.
Some of these people are are good Russians and they're taking out on them.
They're taking out on any way that could be an insurgent and now what happens
you now everyone starts turning against you.
It's a nightmare
without recourse to set piece conventional battle,
the Cheshin and church and said,
argumently arguably achieved the acme of skill by subduing their enemy largely
before the fighting began.
At the same time,
the Russians with their vast superiority in military fire power failed to use
it,
use it to tactical and strategic advantage by employing air and space power
thoughtlessly or unimaginatively,
the Russians power was less effective or even disastrously impotent.
So a lack of imagination,
a lack of creativity,
brutal brutal war
and a lot of lessons learned.
And I can tell you that there's a lot of lessons that were learned by those
Russians on the ground that were absolutely implemented by American forces in,
I know in Ramadi.
Absolutely.
The amount of similarities for that urban combat and the things that we watched
out for because of the sacrifices made by the Russian soldiers.
I'd say he had a huge impact and I'm glad that we were able to take away some
lessons
and take those to the battlefield and Ramadi and do things like protect the
local populous and do things like understand their,
their culture and do things like not take out our aggression on the local
populace,
which only turns to a local populace against you.
And it was that professionalism
of the US military of the U S Army soldiers of the US marines.
That professionalism
to maintain that discipline.
Okay.
Throughout the battle that was actually absolutely critical
in bringing about the victory.
It's crazy how all these um,
uh,
these strategies and tactics or it's all the same.
The Patton book,
like all the books that these messages are,
it's all the same.
It's crazy.
It is.
It is all the same.
It is crazy how similar they are and when they just completely lined up and
again,
it's amazing how the tactics from the battlefield reflect the tactics in
business and reflect the tactics in human life.
Yeah.
You know what you're going,
which kind of gave me an eerie feeling is one,
you talked about the,
the Chechnyan
rebels that there were the rebels,
right?
Because I'm chatting real there,
how they'd attack the Russian morale.
Right.
So what give me an eerie feeling is that's what you get with like,
um,
guys who abuse their girlfriend or their wife.
That's what they do.
They attack their morale.
Yes,
yes.
I don't know why they gave me that feeling,
but it's like,
so because it gave you that eerie feeling because you understand how
devastating.
Yes.
You know,
and it's not exactly,
yeah,
that's the perfect way to put it because it's not this thing where it's
different than chopping off the guys heads and putting it in,
you know,
on,
on steaks.
That's something for sure.
But it's way different.
It's on this weird like kind of covert level,
but still so devastating.
So it's weird,
man.
It's bad when you,
you see a guy doing that too,
like to a girl.
It's,
it's,
it's horrible.
And also in,
you mentioned this earlier,
the morale piece is something that gets ignored so often.
Yeah.
Especially in the business world where people just,
their morale will take a beating,
the market's bad,
all these things.
And if you don't prop up that morale and you don't protect the morale and you
don't defend them around,
you don't strengthen the morale.
That's when you get what's,
what's,
what happened to the Russian soldiers,
the morale fell apart.
Yup.
Yeah.
And a lot of times,
um,
if the morale is down,
like in a company or something,
the leader,
if he's bad,
he'll kind of blame them.
Like,
you guys have bad attitudes.
You know,
we're trying to do some business here and you guys have it bad attitudes,
but it's,
you know,
yeah.
That sounds good.
At the opposite,
they're a leader that's not taking ownership of this situation,
which is why ownership is so important.
Because the minute you start blaming,
I mean you're,
you're just,
you're just putting a nail in the coffin when you start blaming people for bad
morale,
you know,
it's,
uh,
it's the,
hey,
the beatings will continue until morale improves.
Right?
Right.
Yes,
exactly.
Yeah.
Doesn't work.
You know,
the beatings
do not improve morale.
Would you say kind of off the top of your head,
would you say that that's more common than not that just that whole thing where
you know,
just to blame people in general?
Oh absolutely.
Absolutely.
I mean it is absolutely a very common problem in leadership.
Yeah.
That's,
that's why our book has done really well because people say,
Oh man,
yeah,
I do that.
Oh I,
I can't believe I do that.
Yeah.
Cause we never hear any of this stuff.
Like growing up the you'll say,
okay,
don't blame.
But it's,
it's not like a real strong message that you're saying growing up.
I know I wasn't,
I don't think that that people have isolated and focused on ownership at this
level.
Okay.
I think that's why I think that's why the book has done very well.
Yeah.
I think that's why people continue to contact me and say,
hey you guys,
thank you for writing this book.
It's changed the way I look at everything.
It's changed the way I've done my business.
It's changed the way I'm treating my wife.
Yeah.
Changed my family.
It's changed my outlook on my physical failings.
So,
so when you take ownership to that high level and that intensity and you called
extreme ownership.
Yeah,
I think,
I think it has a huge impact.
And I think that we are the first people that have said,
you know what?
This needs to be the focus,
right?
This is the game changer.
This is the fundamental principle in life that is going to turn you from failure
to success.
It's not when you say,
hey,
this person didn't help me in,
this person went against me in this person sabotage me.
That's great.
But it doesn't matter when you take ownership of everything.
Somebody sabotaging me,
I got to own it.
I've got to figure out how to stop them.
Yeah.
And it's just so when you,
when you kind of know that or you kind of get wind to that,
it almost seems so obvious.
Like,
yeah,
well,
what was I thinking?
If I'm going to blame someone said no,
of course they're going to blame me back if I,
if I get belligerent towards someone,
of course,
like Nate belligerent back.
But you don't,
you and you already knew that really if you're ass,
but it's almost,
it's almost like you don't think if I take ownership,
everyone else is going to talk to start taking ownership.
You know?
You don't really think about that that much,
even though after you know it,
it seems real obvious.
These things are simple but not easy.
Well,
not easy.
Yeah,
they really are.
And ownership.
When you take ownership of problems,
when you take ownership of your life and when you don't have anybody else to
blame.
Yeah,
it hurts.
Yeah.
It hurts.
It hurts the ego.
It hurts the mind.
It hurts.
So people,
even though it's really easy,
I'm going to take ownership of everything.
It's hard to do.
It's difficult for people to do.
And when they do do it,
when they do step across that line and they do take ownership,
they absolutely see things turning around.
And I,
I've heard that,
you know,
I mean,
thankfully for the Internet,
thankfully for Twitter and Facebook and all these things,
people hit me up every single day and say either,
hey,
this changed my life.
But sometimes it's just something minor,
you know,
they'll say,
had some issues at work today.
Took ownership over them,
problem solve.
And you're like,
okay,
that's great.
What would that person had done a month ago before they read the book?
They would have blamed somebody else.
They would have shifted the problem.
They would,
you know,
they would,
they would have ignored it.
They would've cast blame somewhere else and they wouldn't have solved the
problem.
So when you take ownership,
it allows you to then solve the problem.
Okay.
So that's what you got to do.
So now it is time for questions from the interwebs.
Yeah.
We actually have a current event question,
which technically has never happened.
Well,
I would say it's not,
I'll explain why it's not a current event once you ask the question.
Right.
Cause it's not.
It is,
but all right.
All right.
What are your thoughts on
the Conor McGregor versus Nate Diaz fight and the Holly Holm versus Misha Tate
fight?
UFC One 96 this past weekend.
Women's Bantamweight Championship.
Holly Holm,
Bruce Misha Tate.
And then it was like a super fight,
right?
Super fight.
Nate Diaz and Conor McGregor was a champ at one 45 and here's why.
This is not a
current events question to me because this is just a question about fighting.
It really is because,
and you could say this at any time,
these were good examples and we'll be talking about these examples in one year,
five years.
And there's other fights that are similar examples.
Holly Holm,
who is a world class kick boxer and boxer.
Yeah.
And a very good mixed martial artists.
However,
not that great at Jujitsu.
Not,
not horrible.
I'm not trying to bag on her because she is awesome.
And a smart fighter.
Two very smart with a great coach,
great corner.
She lost her.
Misha Tate,
who is definitely not as good of a striker,
but who is better on the ground.
Yeah.
And she's real relevant.
Well rounded.
Yeah.
She's extremely well rounded and she's also gotten beat twice by Ronda Rousey.
And the,
the strategy in those fights that she had was awful in the Misha Tate,
Ronda Rousey fight for some reason me shut,
kept clinching and grabbing and trying to take the fight to the ground against
Rhonda,
which was just stupid.
She was clearly a better striker.
So I don't know.
I think that might change the next time they fight Leesha we'll hopefully have a
smarter game plan then trying to grapple with Rhonda.
There's no reason for it.
Yeah.
A better striker.
She needs to take advantage of it.
Yeah.
On the other hand with Holly Holm,
she does get the grappling going.
Yes.
And not,
not easy,
you know,
all anyone's good at avoiding the takedowns
man.
So good.
Um,
but yeah,
finally does it in the,
in the fifth rush,
she had her at the end of the second round,
but you know,
kind of,
you know,
the time ran out.
Um,
and then yeah,
managed to end in the fifth round.
Managed to get it to the ground and immediately finish.
Yeah.
I mean she managed and it's key that you said that she managed to like get get
it to the ground cause it wasn't a beautiful take down or anything.
She got in on her finally she'd gotten stuffed a couple times.
It was Holly was doing a really good job of keeping her at bay and Holly,
he was obviously scared cause even in the second round she got once it was on
the ground or he's just domination by Misha and then
Holly didn't want to go to the ground where there again,
but then she let her get in and then like you said me,
she just forced that been kind of dragged it in an ugly way.
Just kind of make an audit to the ground.
I want you to have the grumps got her back but got her back.
And then when she got her back she got the choke in.
Once you've got the choke in.
Okay.
Holly kind of tried to flip her off and
even that was a little bit of mistake of Hollywood.
It just like students shook her off.
Yeah.
Mike a really good experience Jujitsu player might do,
but she didn't.
She flipped her over and landed on her back and then be shattered.
The choking deep.
Yup.
And Finisher and niches.
I mean we,
she's been in some scraps before.
She is a scrappy,
tough,
she's got a big heart.
She fights with a lot of heart.
I give her,
I give her some props.
I mean,
so does Holly,
of course.
I mean,
Holly went to sleep.
She didn't even tap,
you know,
she was like,
what?
No,
I'm not tapping.
Yeah.
And you could see her instinctively started throwing punches at the end.
I mean,
into the air in a different direction because that's her,
that's her trainer goes to.
Yeah.
It's just crazy how you see that all the time.
Even when guys get knocked out,
ever see guys getting knocked up and then start grappling with their eyes for
sure with the RAF or some shit like that.
Just kind of an unconsciously doing it.
Yeah.
It's kind of a kind of a compliment,
I would say.
You know,
their skill,
like that's all automatic.
Yes.
So automatic.
She's throwing punches at the air.
Yup.
Even though she's asleep.
Yeah.
So,
yeah.
So in this case,
straight up.
Yeah.
Jiu Jitsu works,
right?
Yes.
Okay.
We'll talk about t give us a debrief on the Mcgregor Diaz fight.
See the,
I think it was there a lot of components I think to that.
I think that the,
just give us the outlook of what happened just now.
Okay.
Yeah.
They fought the fight at one 70 in Nate Diaz is either one 55 or I think
sometimes he's farther,
we'll know he's,
he's part of one 70 before.
Yeah.
But,
but he's be,
his normal weight for fighting is one 55.
So Mcgregor's normal way for fighting is one 47 he came up 10 pounds.
But due to the late nature of the bout,
they actually ended up finding out one 70.
Yeah.
So they fight and it was,
it was a little battle and I think from what I saw,
he was,
it was close,
but I think Conor McGregor caught him like some solid ones called them a couple
of solid ones.
Yeah.
And then,
um,
then yet shifted.
And then Nate started catching him and jamming him up and,
and,
and I think that's really what did it,
because he,
he started beating him up and then Connor went for a take down.
And that's what you typically,
what you do when you,
when you go for that takedown and the way he did,
that's when you get beat up and you'd go for the clinch.
You know what?
I want to avoid getting beat up.
Even in boxing,
they do that,
you know,
you can beat it.
You go for the parents.
So that was kind of what that kind of was.
And in MMA you just,
you go for the take down.
That's kind of what it is.
Um,
so he did,
but,
and that's the thing that here comes to Jujitsu right where he is.
She,
it's,
so the reality is Conor McGregor couldn't,
that wasn't an option for him,
were sure he went for the take down.
But going to the take down is even worse now because Nate Diaz is one of the,
he's a really good Jujitsu,
got really good.
So,
and kind of McGregory still working on his Jujitsu good from what I hear or
whatever.
But not like Nate Diaz.
Nate Diaz is like levels above them.
Absolutely.
So it goes to the ground and it really showed,
so not only is Connor kind of beat up a little bit and,
and dazed now he's on the ground.
He has to do Jujitsu now,
which is,
that's a,
that's a double a double strike on him.
So of course he,
you know,
he takes a couple more shots and then Nate choked him out pretty pretty quick.
Yeah,
I bought him that your Jyutsu skill and,
and one thing that does is pointing out the whole week when they were getting
interviewed and everything.
He says,
uh,
you know,
here I have better training partners in you.
They'll go,
I'm rolling with and look who he is rolling with.
Yeah.
He's running with his brother Nick.
He's one with Jake shields who's a beast on the ground.
I mean he's run with all those little bad ass wrestlers to,
he's got uncrowned.
Yeah,
you got grown up there.
I mean these guys are getting after it.
You know what I mean?
Yeah.
And so,
uh,
who's,
I mean,
I don't know.
I mean he trained with Gunnar,
what's Mcgregor train with gunner gunner's good and everything.
But yes.
But the thing is about the Jujitsu and about the training,
the guys that you're training with all the time,
that's the guy that you trained with every day.
That's what makes you good.
Not The guy that comes out for a two week camp or a four week camp or a six week
camp that does not make you good at Jujitsu.
Might sharpen up one or two things,
but it's not the life,
right.
It's not the deep daily grind with the,
with the masters,
you know,
that's what's make you really good.
Yep.
So I think that,
like I said,
I mean it's,
it's definitely showed the Jujitsu definitely works.
Uh,
and it also shows you how hard it is to get good at how much harder it is to get
good at,
as dragging,
meaning Misha.
No,
she was not dominating,
but she was surviving on the stand up.
You know what I mean?
And this is a world class striker.
I mean she's,
she's definitely a better striker than Misha.
Tate is a grappler.
I mean Misha Tate doesn't have any tremendous accolades as a grappler.
She's a high level MMA grappler but she's not a world champion grappler.
Right.
And yet,
you know,
she was able to hang because striking is uh,
for the most part,
from a thought perspective is a linear thought pattern of throwing strikes and
another human grappling is infinitely more complex,
infinitely,
infinitely more complex.
And so you have to learn it earlier and if you want to
do may make something of it.
I mean cause striking striking has an element of luck to it.
I don't care what you say is striking has,
I mean we know when to MMA fighters go in the cage.
There's not a guy that says,
hey,
I can definitely knock this guy out.
There is absolutely there's,
you know,
knockouts are seldom even in boxing where the ole object is a punch.
The other guy and they had knocked them out.
Whereas a rear naked choke is a rear naked choke.
You know it like you,
you know,
it's a real Nigga joke.
It is a very,
very assured weapon to be utilizing in those situations.
Yeah.
I remember one time I was talking to Henner Henner Gracie,
he just made a real small short comparison to,
I think it was boxing.
He said the average person can walk into a boxing gym in and rock someone and
knock them out.
He used the word he and rock someone if he just swings for the fences.
Right.
And,
and that is possible.
But Jujitsu,
when you can't really do that,
you can't really,
a new guy come in as a white belt and just go real hard and just saying somehow
catch someone.
One of these submission holds.
So yeah.
And once you learn that you and the other guy doesn't know it and he hasn't
learned it or it hasn't learned it even close to how much you've learned it,
it's that,
it's that easy.
Really.
It's the really,
the best way to say it is you have that much control over the fight
you do.
Now,
the thing is,
I don't want to make,
like all of a sudden,
Jujitsu
by itself is the all powerful thing because you can't discount that the dozens
and dozens and dozens of Jujitsu people,
Ben had been beaten in MMA,
they've been beaten down,
they've been knocked out,
they print an ad,
they're shots stuffed.
So there,
there's no doubt about that.
But
it's,
it is definitely the skill that you have to have in this day and age for mixed
martial arts for sure.
I mean,
without it,
you know,
you get beat and without it,
what you have is UFC one and UFC to Jujitsu just beats the other martial arts,
whether it's wrestling or whether it's boxing,
it doesn't matter,
you know,
but
you do have to train everything.
I mean,
and Jujitsu it takes the longest to learn.
There's the most to learn.
So you should start with it.
But you've got to know how to box,
Kinda know how to Russell,
you know,
gotta Know Moy Tai.
MMM.
And that's the way it is.
Yeah.
And when you have that much of a discrepancy between like a certain element of,
of people's game,
like in,
and I think Jujitsu tends to be the more prevalent because a lot of times people
will be like,
oh well certain guys like let's say like a chocolate l or Klieg Weda they're
like,
hey,
these aren't,
well actually we'll just say chocolate dough.
He's not necessarily a Jiu Jitsu black belt and he was champion or whatever.
But the thing is he knew he had a wrestling background so he had grappling but
he knew about Jujitsu or,
yeah,
for sure early he knew about like where the arm bar comes from,
where the jokes come from,
how to defend the choke,
all these things.
So knowing you did sue saying like you need to know Jujitsu isn't,
doesn't necessarily mean you gotta be a black belt in Jujitsu or you have to
have the slickest,
sharpest submissions necessarily.
You just have to know Jujitsu and if you don't know it or know very little you,
I'd say the chances of you getting exposed,
exposed is really high.
Yeah,
I agree with and I think these just so happened last night,
um,
that,
those fights exemplified that.
I agree with you.
Got It.
Got another Jujitsu.
As I was listening to your recent podcast,
I thought that have a few topics you could discuss that would be good and
helpful for your young guys.
Want to join the military and go special ups.
I know that bud and other training or just baseline entry level schools,
but in my experience those stories are what get guys excited and fired up.
So you know,
guy wants to hear about bud stories and what it's like going through those
stories through,
through those types of training because it gets people excited and fired up.
Well,
there's,
there's actually kind of a reason why I don't sit around and talk about buds,
which is basic seal,
basic underwater demolition seal training.
There's a reason I don't sit around and talk about it a bunch.
Um,
one of those reasons is because buds is not the seal teams at all and it doesn't
mean anything.
And I try and say that as often as I can because I don't want people to get the
impression that
that the seal teams is the little initial training that does barely even a
fraction of your career in the seal teams and it has nothing to do with what you
actually do when you get in the seal teams.
I also don't want,
and this is an intentional,
this is more of a response to the question,
but I don't tell stories to get guys fired up to join the military about buds
because that isn't what the seal teams is.
That's not what an SF ODA team is.
That's not what ranger battalion is.
Ranger Battalion.
An SF is not the selection course to that you go through to get into them.
That's not what the job is and you shouldn't be joining
the military and shouldn't be trying to get into special operations because you
want to do that training.
Okay,
you should do the training because you want to do the job.
You want to do the actual job of being in special operations and being in
special forces in bean rangers,
in being in Marsoc and being in the seal teams,
you should want to do that job
and if you wanted do that job,
what it really boils down to an running or walking or pull ups or swimming or
any of that crap.
It boils down to whether you have the two wheels that I talk about that war is
determined by.
Okay,
and that is
the will to kill because that is the entire premise of your job.
If you're in the military at all,
you may be somehow
supporting that if you were in the military,
but the ultimate goal of the military is to kill the bad guys and if you're
going to be in special operations,
you're going to be on the tip of the spear of that.
So you absolutely have to make sure that you have the will to kill
and you also,
obviously if you're going to join special operations or you want to be in the
seal teams,
you have to have the will to die.
Not that you want to die,
not that you want to be a martyr,
not that you're freaking suicidal or anything like that,
but you absolutely have to make sure that you have the willingness
to die.
And I would say put your life on the line.
But no,
I'm going beyond that.
I'm talking about the willingness to die
because if you join special operations or you join the seal teams or you join
any of the combat arms in the army or in the Marine Corps,
okay,
you will be asked to put your life on the line
and you gotta be ready to do that.
You got to have that.
Will you gotta be ready to make that commitment?
And I mean the training,
if you,
if you have that will to kill and you have that will to die,
the training,
Rhonda Swim,
do pushups,
do pull ups,
dips,
sprints,
do rope,
climbs,
do flutter kicks,
all that stuff.
It's the easy part.
And so if you're sitting there and you see seal training on TV and you think,
oh,
that'd be cool.
Don't think about that as what being a CEO is,
because it is not.
That is just the selection.
Okay.
It's just the weeding out of the week.
If you want to be a seal means you want to be a commando.
It means you want to go into harm's way.
It means you want to meet to the enemy on the field of battle.
That's what being a seal is,
and that's why I really don't sit around and tell bud stories.
I don't think I have too much more to say about that one.
I'm sure at some point I'll get,
I mean,
there's funny things that happened in buds.
of course,
but there was this compared to like what happens in a seal platoon there just no
big deal.
Yeah.
That's interesting how you put it.
Don't focus,
don't do it because you want to go through that training.
Yeah.
Do it too,
because you want to do the job.
Yeah.
That's a big,
that's a big mistake.
Maybe I can help some people out that are out there right now thinking,
oh,
I'd really like to go through that training.
[inaudible] no,
don't do it to go through the training.
Go do it because you want to do that job.
Yeah.
Is it true the,
they take a pin and they stick it in your skin and clip,
pin it on your skin that you,
they do that well when you get your trident.
Yeah.
D the it has like three little prongs that go out the back of it to stick it
under your uniform and when you get your training,
yeah.
They put it into your skin.
Yeah.
It's like you standing there with no shirt.
They're like,
oh,
like that.
Then they and then they like punch it in and then yeah.
You know everybody,
when I went,
when I got my tried and the whole team lined up and everyone punched you right
in the chest until you're just bleeding everywhere and the big bruise under
just,
yeah.
Interesting.
Next question.
Do you have experience with people telling you that you're too intense?
Okay.
Or the need to work on not being so upfront and straightforward?
Sometimes it's called working on your how.
I think it would be great to hear how you could apply this using extreme
ownership in the business world.
There is a big push on diversity,
which is wonderful,
but often it comes with also Dave diversifying away from intensity and male
aggression,
quote unquote.
I'd love your thoughts.
Well,
this is
okay.
It's kind of interesting to get this question.
It's kind of strange get this question because all the time when I talk about
leadership,
I talk about how often do you hear me say take the indirect approach to
something [inaudible].
Yay.
I always talk about the indirect approach because the direct approach is,
is not Jujitsu.
The direct approach is beating your head and punching someone in the face.
So I'm always talking about using the indirect approach.
So by it's very nature,
indirect is not straight forward.
Right,
okay.
It's not intense.
Yeah.
So no,
I don't have people telling me I'm too intense or I'm too straightforward.
Why don't I have them telling me that?
Because I'm not
okay.
I am not,
and I'm not saying that I'm not intense.
I'm not saying that I'm not straight forward,
but I'm very,
very careful not to go too far with either.
Okay.
This is,
this is like a fighter that's swinging too hard or being too predictable or just
will stand and trade and take damage and do damage.
Okay.
That's the direct approach.
The direct approaches.
I punched you in the face and you punch me in the face and we play a war of
attrition.
I don't want to enter into a war of attrition.
I do not want to enter into a war of attrition.
I want to use a maneuver warfare.
I want to move,
I want to slip unseen into the weak areas and set my bombs and have them go off.
So I just got this asked this the other night by a relatively new client of
mine,
you know,
are you going to get in their faces and and getting the feces of the leadership
and tell him straight up that they need to get their act together.
And you could see that this person was very excited by that idea and it was one
of the senior leaders are not.
That was that you had this idea that I was,
would come in and just get in their faces and tell him how screwed up they were.
And
I said,
no,
I,
I likely will not do that.
And then I said to him,
I said,
look,
what if I told you that you are all screwed up when you were a failure at your
job and you do.
You're a weak leader.
Nope.
What would you then be,
feel like you really wanted to listen to me?
Would you,
would you be open to my suggestions at that point?
Do you think I'd be an efficient coach?
Do you think I would even appear as an intelligent human being?
If the best I could do to coach you was to tell you that you sucked as a leader
and you are a failure at your job and you're screwing everything up
and are we see the answers were no,
no,
of course not.
I would be a horrible coach.
I would be a horrible leader myself if that's what I resorted to.
Okay.
And most importantly,
if I want you to change n,
the way I'm trying to get you to train is by the change is by being abusive and
begging you to send up your defenses and not listen to me.
And what the hell good am I doing?
Why would I do anything that's going to inhibit my goal?
Which my goal is to get you to change,
get you to be a better leader.
So if I slap you in the face
with aggression or it's straight forwardness,
that makes you defensive.
How does that help me?
The answer is it doesn't.
Now again,
that doesn't mean that I'm never straight forward and then I'm never aggressive.
But I calculate those moments.
I calculate those woman's,
there's a reason
why we sugarcoat medicine for little children,
right there is why is it so they take it?
It's so they take it into their system
and it's the same thing with adults.
And people say,
don't sugar coat it,
don't you?
Don't just tell me how it is.
They don't mean it.
They want it sugarcoated because they want to accept it into their body.
It's just like Jujitsu.
You need to use Jujitsu.
You need to set things up.
You need to manipulate,
get people to do what you want to do,
especially if it has to do with them changing themselves.
One of the worst ways to get someone to change is by telling them exactly how
you want them to change.
I mean,
of course their situation.
We have this beautiful relationship and you've built it with someone.
You have this intimate trust with another human being.
I don't think I have that with anybody,
but there have been situations in my life where I've had,
oh,
just complete,
utter trust with,
you know,
maybe there's three or four people that I have that within my whole life that I
can just say,
listen man,
here's the deal.
Don't get defensive.
Here's what's going on.
Here's what you need to adjust.
Very few people do.
You have that relationship in life.
So you gotta use that
nuance and that maneuver warfare.
And it's the same thing with aggression.
It's the same thing that this we just read in this article,
don't yell at the Cheshin people.
You're not going to be able to get what you want from them.
And like I said,
it doesn't just apply to those people that applies to all people.
You got to bring people in and you got to manipulate them.
And I know that,
again,
that has negative connotations,
but it's what you're doing.
You're trying to get someone to think a different way.
That's manipulation.
You can call it influence,
you can call whatever you want,
but that's what you're trying to do.
And the most difficult way to manipulate someone is to slap them in the face
with aggression.
So there's a little dichotomy here of course,
because you know,
I always say the default mode has to be aggressive,
but I don't mean necessarily overtly aggressive.
It means that you're aggressively forcing things to go in your direction through
every means necessary through overt and covert and clendette Stein.
And honestly,
the preferred method of all is covert.
The preferred method for me to get an echo to do something different is for echo
to never even think I had an opinion on it is for me just to sneak in there
behind enemy lines,
plant the seeds and let them grow and let echo come to the conclusion that
you're going to change the way you're doing something.
You're going to do it up the think differently about something.
That's leadership.
That's real leadership,
so
that's what you got to work on.
If somebody is telling you you're too intense and too aggressive guests what you
are,
you're giving away your greatest weapon.
You're advertising your attack.
Surprise is one of the most key components in a battle,
and when you tell people aggressively an overtly
what you're doing,
you're giving up that element.
Don't do it.
I'm asking you not to be a manipulative person behind the scenes,
okay?
With weird plans,
but that is what I'm asking you to do.
That's is what I'm asking you to do because that is how you get things done.
That is how you get into people's minds.
That is how you lead.
Not by yelling,
not by being overly aggressive,
not by being so intense that people don't want to listen to you because
intensity is a form of emotion.
Right?
And the minute you come across as an emotional intense maniac,
people are questioning already your validity.
This guys,
you're too intense.
Don't be that guy.
Manipulate influence,
be clandestine and covert.
And that
is how you win.
The reason that it was kind of laughing,
um,
what was reading this question is
that it kind of makes sense from someone to kind of from the outside and the
only,
and the main terms when me personally where I would view you as being intense or
aggressive or,
or is like when you're just talking about something that you,
you're never doing it towards anybody,
you know,
like you'll never lose it.
I've never been,
I've known you since
Oh six I pink,
something like that.
Yeah.
Um,
in,
I've never seen you'd lose your temper.
Get Mad.
I mean,
kind of l one time.
It's funny I was talking to laugh about it.
Oh,
we'd never really seen you get mad,
but maybe one or two times you have this aggressive and intense persona for
sure.
And when you talk about things,
for sure.
But yeah,
when you're dealing with people,
it's real like basically the way you'd want to be
engaged with another human.
Yeah,
yeah,
yeah.
Just Justin wants to have somebody get aggressive with them.
It's never,
it never,
the only time it works,
it's like if you're handling a prisoner,
like literally if I'm handling a prisoner,
I'll be aggressive with them.
Yeah.
If I'm trying to get command of a,
of a,
of a chaotic situation and there's a,
there's another aggressor in the situation,
I might have to be more aggressive than that person,
but any normal situation dealing with human beings,
aggression isn't a attribute.
It's a negative because all it does is make people defensive.
Yup.
Now listen,
eat.
It doesn't mean that you're sitting back in your shirking and s and shriveling
up.
No.
But it means that you're finding the balance with another person and you're,
you're working with them and conversing with them to bring them along into your
way of thinking.
Yeah.
That's what it is in,
in,
you know,
when somebody asks me a question like this,
it,
it really signifies to me that it makes me nervous because I think to myself,
I see this all the time.
I mean,
I say use the indirect approach.
Don't get people's defenses up.
I say this all the time,
and yet someone can still come back and say,
you know,
people are telling me I'm being too aggressive.
Like they're not even taking ownership of the fact that they're being too
aggressive.
Right.
It's like the other people are weak.
Yeah.
And therefore since they're weak,
they think I'm too aggressive.
I can't believe how pathetic they are.
Yeah.
That's the reality.
That's what's going through someone like this mind.
Like sometimes it's called a working on your,
how,
you know,
he's kind of saying,
oh,
they're,
they've got a euphemism for it.
And,
and in the business world there's a big push on diversity,
but it comes with diversifying away from intensity and male aggression.
I mean,
you can guarantee what the,
what this this guy thought I was going to say like,
no,
you got to just stay the path you've got to,
if people can't take it,
you got to crush them.
Nope.
No,
actually that's a complete wrong answer.
Yeah.
If people can't take it,
it's because you are being too aggressive,
you know?
The way you're giving it is wrong.
The way you're to is wrong.
So that aggression needs to be channeled in such a way that it's being utilized
to further the goal.
Yeah.
To further the goal and you know who you get aggressive with.
Okay.
Yourself.
Yeah.
You get aggressive with yourself.
That's who I get aggressive with.
You know?
I'm straight forward with,
I'm straightforward with myself.
That's who I'm straight forward with.
I'm the one guy that I'm allowed to get aggressive with,
to be straight forward with,
to put things in,
to not sugarcoat anything.
I'm allowed to do that with me,
but I'm not allowed to do it with another human because it's ineffective
way of leadership.
It just is not.
Yeah.
It's fun.
It's funny how like,
that's absolutely true.
And with you what I said is abs.
Absolutely true.
I don't think
I've ever seen you get mad at someone else,
but at the same thing,
at the same time.
And I think a lot of people who may not know you good but,
but have,
have experienced being around you,
they all feel,
I would say that they all feel the same way and that is that,
yeah.
Fucking jackals cool or whatever.
But if he were to like lose his temper on me,
he PR,
I'd probably die.
Yeah.
Good.
And they're right.
Like I'm glad I'm not losing my temper.
Yeah.
Right.
That wouldn't be good at all.
Yeah.
That'd be bad.
I have,
you know,
that would not be good for people.
I don't think
that's the dichotomy though,
right.
That is that,
that sense of safety,
yet the sense of impending doom is there at the same time.
Yeah.
And,
and,
and I think,
I think it does genuinely surprise people.
Yeah.
Because I look like a serial killer.
I'm a big guy,
whatever.
And they expect
that
dad,
I'm going to be aggressive in implementing this and you know,
you gotta get your shit together.
Right.
But it's just not,
it just ineffective way of leadership.
If that was,
if that was leadership,
leadership of the visa would be easy.
Right?
Yeah.
I'm just gonna yell at everyone.
They're going to do what I say,
you know?
Yeah.
I'm just going to yell at everyone and then they'll do what I say.
That just does not work.
Yeah.
It's crazy though,
because just the way you talk a lot of the times,
not all the time,
but just the way maybe it's like just how you saw it.
I don't know your voice.
I don't know.
It's probably everything really is,
you do sound intense even though you're not being intense,
you know,
you just kind of seem that way for all these reasons.
Of course.
Well,
it's like you said earlier when I'm talking about something that I care about,
right?
Yes.
I am definitely going to be intense about it,
especially when it's something that is impactful to me and something that means
something to me and trick to me.
Leadership does mean a lot to me.
Yeah.
And and trying to help people lead.
It is an important thing to me.
I enjoy it and I like to see people succeed,
so therefore when I talk about it,
sometimes I get a little bit fired up and I get intense with what I'm saying.
That is it scary that just Kinda,
it's like indirectly scary,
so it's not,
let me scare you.
Okay.
I'll just,
I'll use the word scary.
It's indirectly scary where when you do it it's like,
oh,
I'm not scared of what you're doing,
but you kind of can't imagine.
You're like,
all right.
What if you know,
you're kind of like,
you're like this raging hurricane that when it comes by,
it turns into like a warm,
gentle breeze.
You know what I mean?
Like,
and maybe that's a,
that's probably part of the advantage.
Yeah.
Part of the advantages people,
you know,
I said this,
I think it was Tim Ferriss,
I said this to you.
People are surprised when I can sit there and have a conversation with them and
I'm not aggressive with them and I'm,
my mind is open to what they're saying.
Yeah.
That's part of the game.
All right,
next question.
Okay.
Jocko,
your reaction to mar soc,
right?
Marcel,
m e r s o c Performing Marine Corps Special Operations Command.
Yeah.
So that's a new,
the new thing.
Um,
so,
and this is the question that he's asking it.
So Marines think bill their seals now or,
yeah,
we should be or we should have been marines all along.
So this is a question about,
like I said,
the Marine Corps Special Operations Command,
it was formed in,
I don't know,
2005,
2006 maybe.
Um,
and,
and if you don't know,
the army has its own special operations group.
The navy has its own special operations group.
The air force has its own special operations group and the Marine Corps did not
wait.
What is force recon?
Have you ever heard of it?
Yeah,
of course we can force recon was a part of the marine corps,
but it wasn't broken off and,
and it didn't get the extra money in the extra funding and it didn't fall into
the chain of command of special operations.
Gotcha.
And so when they made mar soc,
it did,
so now they took a bunch of the force recon guys and put them into a group and
have their own funding and everything else.
So the bottom line is on this
is that the Marine Corps is awesome and I loved the Marine Corps and I think
that this was long overdue.
I think that the Marine Corps as a whole
is likely,
it's likely the most capable fighting unit the world has ever known,
to be honest with you.
I mean maybe the,
in addition,
the airborne divisions from the army or also just highly capable,
but the marine corps with its air ground,
see it's got command and control.
It's got integrated intelligence,
it's got everything and it can use it all together.
And so that makes it just an extremely
effective and efficient fighting force.
And they are highly disciplined,
they're highly motivated,
there's an incredible a spree decor.
So
for me,
this was long overdue and I think that I actually did a turnover with the,
with the initial kind of mar soc group in 2004 in Baghdad.
And I had worked with the Marine Corps on,
I had more work with force recon on multiple deployments when I was a younger
seal and they took a bunch of those guys,
a bunch of just legendary force recon guys and put them into this first mar soc
company and they were awesome,
awesome warriors,
awesome guys.
And I think I actually have one thing that that's a huge benefit to them is in
the Marine Corps you're in the Marine Corps.
So every marine corps,
every marine is a rifleman.
They have the opportunity to work with big conventional infantry companies and
platoons and battalion.
So,
so their guys will be very experienced.
And I think that they are going to be,
I mean I think that the Marine Corps Special Operations Command is going to be
an extremely capable force in the future.
And I am glad to say the least,
that they will be defending our country and freedom around the world for many,
many years to come.
Yeah.
That kind of goes along with what,
how you were saying or a lot of these points that these books make about how the
discipline and the training are so paramount,
you know,
in success and now you have yet another division that's going to get some solid
training,
you know?
Yeah,
for sure.
There's no doubt the marine corps will put these guys through outstanding
training.
Yeah.
Okay.
Next question.
Do you consider shooting a martial art and how has your firearms training been
like or unlike martial arts training?
Well,
shooting is absolutely a martial art.
I mean maybe not the way people pictured martial arts nowadays be because when
you picture a martial art people picture,
you know,
a guy with a Guiana doing karate.
That's,
that's right.
That's the generic picture.
To me that's not,
that's not martial arts.
Actually,
to me,
martial arts is the art of war.
The Art of the individual warrior skills that it takes and firearms are
absolutely a martial art because it's something that you train.
It's something that you get good at.
It's something that you need to maintain your skill at and it is absolutely a
martial art and to me,
okay
it's another piece of the puzzle.
It's another thing that you should know.
You need to know how do and
just like tactics that go along with shooting are an important part of being a
warrior.
You need not a shoot and the training is very similar in my mind to martial arts
training in that it takes,
you know,
repetition.
You have to know what the basics are and you have to repeat those basics and
then you get more advanced and it's,
it's about movement and getting efficient with your movement
in.
Then you want to train it very similar to the way that you train mixed martial
arts or martial arts in general.
And that is,
you know,
you're going to have different threat levels and how you get to deal with them
and you want to deal with your weak side.
You know,
you can,
you shoot with your off hand in various environments and the low light in the
dark in the rain and the,
you want to mix it up.
So you're used to all of it.
You want to be used to people at close range,
you want to be used to people at farther range.
And then once you get all those mechanical skills down,
then you want to train your mind around this thing.
You want to train your mind around this skill so that your mind knows how to
utilize this skill when things are unexpected and when there's chaos and when
there's mayhem going on.
And that's,
that's one of the things that I really like about simunition training or paint
ball training or laser tag training is it allows you,
it allows you to have somebody else shoot back at you from,
which is just like,
you know,
just like Roland in Jujitsu or sparring,
more tie or sparring.
MMA is you have to react to the person.
It's no longer just a Kata,
right?
It's no longer just shooting paper targets that don't shoot back and don't move.
So you,
so I love to take it.
Once you've got the skills down and then you learn,
you've got the fundamentals down,
then you'd take the advanced fundamentals and then you begin to train to
simulate combat.
And this is oc tell Ya,
I had these,
um,
I got these laser tag guns for my son and I just got two of them at first.
But that escalated very quickly because they were awesome.
They were these little nerf laser tag guns and you could shoot each other at,
I dunno,
maybe a hundred meters,
which is a pretty good shot.
And it was like a pistol.
And so when I got these,
and as soon as I got two of them and I realized how good they were,
I bought two more so I could go against my son and his friends and they could go
against each other.
And I taught my son like all the basic military maneuvers that he would need to
know.
And this is when he was maybe eight years old.
Okay.
And
we would play this game all the time,
you know?
And so I taught him how to have cover and move.
I taught him how to get elevated positions.
I taught them how to do individual movement techniques where you don't show your
face at the same spot like twice in a row.
Every time you get up you move a little bit.
And he,
he realized that that's how you win in these little games and they're real.
Those are the real tactics.
And so I had a speaking,
speaking of speaking of the Marine Corps,
I had a friend that,
uh,
was,
was came over to the house one time and he was,
you know,
of a marine.
And
we got in the conversation and all of a sudden,
you know,
my son comes out with the laser tag guns and my son's like,
oh,
you know,
do you want to go?
And the guy's like,
Yo,
yeah,
of course,
let's do it.
So my son looks at him and says,
indoor or outdoor and he,
all of a sudden you could see there was something going on and the guy goes
outdoor,
outdoor.
So my son that you press the button on the thing and it counts down for 10
seconds and then it's on.
So wait,
so you go find cover or something like that.
So 10 seconds.
My son hits the thing,
my son takes off out the door,
so I'm watching the guy and the guy,
this guy is doomed because you know you're going against the train.
So the guy comes out and,
and it's dark,
right?
But the guy comes out of the door and I'm watching him and he's kind of crouched
a little bit and all of a sudden his gun,
because it all is in this once a,
it's all takes place inside the gun.
You don't wear a helmet,
you don't wear anything that you actually are shooting the other person's gun.
And when it's shot,
when he,
when he gets shot and exist and shakes and a red light flashes.
So he walks out and sure enough,
my son had run around the block,
gone in an elevated position.
And as soon as he came walking out,
my son started drilling him and the guys like Steve Freezes.
It's interesting.
Like he freezes.
He doesn't even think to myself,
oh,
I'll take cover.
No,
he just froze and got drilled.
And then as soon as it's easy standing there is kind of looking around,
looking around,
looking around.
And finally he sees my son.
He starts to point the weapon up towards my son.
My son just disappears.
And then the guys could keep,
the guy starts kind of walking over in that direction.
And then 15 seconds later my son pops up on his flank and drills them again from
behind another fence in a hole in the wall.
And anyways,
he ends up killing them.
And then the guys,
okay,
let's go again.
And my son beat him like three times in a row.
And it's because he had the basic,
the basic skills,
basic infantry men skills is what it was,
you know,
he would shoot and then move and that's what it boils down to.
So that kind of thing is,
is very important in as far as being a martial art.
And you should train.
You don't,
that's another thing,
you know,
I said this to Sam Harris when I was on his podcast.
You know?
Yeah,
maybe there's no chance because you live in a bubble and you live in a great
neighborhood and you're well protected.
You have alarm system in your house and all that,
and maybe you're never going to have a problem.
And that's great.
I mean,
there's always a chance.
I would never believe that you're never gonna have a problem,
but there's always a chance that is going to crunch that evil is going to enter
your world and you want to be ready for that.
Now,
if that makes me sound paranoid,
okay,
let's just say you're not paranoid and you don't think it's ever going to
happen,
but it is still highly valuable to train in these situations because they make
you a better person.
They make you sharper,
they make you smarter,
they make you more prepared if something does happen,
it's just good to know this stuff and it makes you a better person,
more reliable.
It's a real skill set.
You know?
I always was kind of bummed out about basketball or football or baseball because
those are the,
there,
there are life skills involved in them.
I don't want to say that,
but the skill itself
of throwing a baseball,
of shooting a basketball,
of throwing a football is not as valuable as a skill,
as number one,
a martial artist,
you know,
moy,
Thai boxing,
wrestling,
Jiu Jitsu,
because those are real applicant applicable to life 100%.
And this the same thing with shooting a gun.
I mean that is a real applicable skill that you may need at some point in your
life.
And you should have it.
Let me know.
What supplements do you an echo take?
What supplements do you take?
Well,
my number one supplement is steak.
Steak.
Yes.
Beautiful steak.
That's the number one.
Um,
well there,
there are a couple things that I take.
Number one,
I take Krill oil.
I've taken it every day for probably
10 years,
maybe a little bit longer day.
And I take glucosamine and I've taken that every day for 10 plus years.
I got,
I had,
well,
my shoulder was bothering me many years ago and someone said,
hey,
take krill oil,
take glucosamine.
And I said,
actually,
know what?
It wasn't Krill oil.
It was fish oil.
At the time.
Right.
But at the same time,
I just started taking both and within a short period of time my shoulder got
better and it had been a nagging nine month injury.
So I don't know which one of those two did it,
but I'll never going to find out cause I'm always going to take them both.
Um,
I,
you know,
I eat a lot of coconut oil whenever I get the chance.
I like dipping things in coconut oil.
Coconut oil is a,
if you get a taste for it,
it's a really nice tasting thing.
Yeah.
So that's,
that's the supplements that I take.
Uh,
you know,
one thing that's been really cool is,
is picking up a sponsorship from on it for the podcast.
You know,
from Joe,
uh,
who's obviously been a big supporter.
He's the,
he's actually the reason that we're sitting here right now just because Joe
Rogan,
I mean,
Tim Ferriss said the same thing with Joe Rogan said,
you need to have your own podcast.
And I said,
okay,
and here we are.
Uh,
and he was,
you know,
real supportive.
So I definitely like supporting him.
And his company,
uh,
with on it.
But what's great is they make good quality stuff and it's real simple.
Yeah.
Well funny as in I didn't really tell you about this,
but if you go,
if you go on gone on the website on,
on it,
the Onnit website,
you can get stuck on there for a long time.
Just reading all this stuff about it.
You know like the Krill oil was one and I knew about Krill oil from long time
and there krill are like these little,
they're like little shrimp basically teeny tiny.
Sure.
Anyway,
so teeny tiny shrimp.
Yeah,
for lack of a better way of putting it.
But how they get it is like,
it's all ecofriendly where it doesn't destroy the or affect the ecosystem.
Even the big ship,
the vessel that they used to the harvest,
the Krill is like low emissions,
specifically certified like Dang.
It's real in depth thing.
He gets stuck on this real interesting too.
Cause they tell you like what are the benefits,
you know,
how do they know that these benefits are there?
Cause you can't just say,
hey
take this,
it'll cure this.
You can't just do that.
You got to go through this process too.
I switched over to Krill oil,
I dunno,
maybe like seven years ago or something.
At some point I went from fish oil.
Krill oil.
Yeah.
Apparently there's fun.
It's like little bit,
a little bit better.
So I think he's a lot better.
Yeah.
Well at least when you read about it,
but to me people ask me,
you know,
Oh what do you do?
You know,
cause I'm 44 years old.
Old Man.
Right.
But I don't feel 44 yeah,
I feel 24 you don't feel 40 for I feel,
I feel 24 and actually the thing that originally turned me on to fish oil was
there was a guy that was a bad ass guy and he was 54 but he was a competitive
power lifter when he was younger and he was in really good shape.
And this is probably when I was,
well one,
it was,
I had done at that,
so 15 years ago or something like that.
I was like 30 years old and this guy looked young and healthy and I said,
you know,
hey w w what do you do?
Like what's your main thing to keep you so young and healthy?
And he said,
I take fish oil every day.
I said,
okay,
cool.
Let's try that.
Yeah,
we'll get on board that train.
Yeah.
So yeah,
too bad ass city for some today and no,
no Krill oil.
We'll get you some critical.
Right on.
Thank you.
Had you could get criminal Krill oil at uh,
on a.com back slash Jocko.
That's right.
What would flesh it thing?
I don't know what it is forwards last actually I put it on the,
on the website on both websites,
the chocolate store website and the Jocko podcast website.
So wheat and oil and you and they give us a discount.
So or so on.
It is giving our listeners a discount like 10% my people and what I did find out
on audit,
regardless of whatever discount you get,
the you have free shipping on everything except I want to say that the big old
dump kettlebells,
but everything else is telling me you get free shipping.
We just kind of seems like a small deal and doing it cause that's so things
online and stuff before like 10 shirts
I've been under.
So teacher,
um,
and of course I bought things online,
but when you see that free shipping,
I don't know,
it's just something,
it seems small meals like legit.
Yeah.
You,
you kind of feel it,
you know,
knew it wouldn't nonetheless,
people probably want to know what supplements you take.
People mainly would ask me that in college is when everyone wants to see what's
up because they think for some reason that supplements give you big muscles or
something.
They don't,
they don't think about that whole working out.
Yeah.
The whole working out thing.
I mean,
yeah,
that was secondary.
Um,
but yeah,
in the,
in,
in Jujitsu that they care less about muscles there this little,
they'll be like,
Eh,
you know,
it's actually,
you get kind of teased sometimes in Jujitsu if you have big muscles,
it's weird.
You don't get teased,
but you lose credit for your skill suggest on your side.
Yeah.
That too.
But you kind of do get tea every role with,
you know,
you get done rolling.
They're like,
man,
you're strong.
You Damn right.
Yeah.
I been training for 20 years too,
by the way,
has nothing to do with this.
I take,
uh,
the only supplement I take Alpha brain,
the instant one.
Oh,
the yesterday and I w I do take a pre workup,
which is,
I mean,
I'm going to be honest,
I don't know if I should take a pre workout pre workout.
Is it just,
you know what that is,
right?
It's like a little powder.
It's like,
it's a stimulant.
It's caffeine basically has caffeine in it typically.
And um,
an Otu nitric,
nitric oxide,
it basically makes your,
it Faisal dilate to you so your vessels get dilated.
So it delayed,
you get more of a pump,
it gives you energy.
It's just like,
it's basically stimulate energy.
Um,
so you know,
if you're not in the mood for working out,
but I found this little sweet,
sweet little combo you put out for bring instant with it.
Or just with coffee,
drink some coffee and the Alpha brain incent.
It hits you at the same time.
If you didn't want to work out,
you'll want to work out without Jack.
But yeah.
So yeah,
that's it.
That's pretty much it.
It's funny because a lot of people,
they think that if you take protein powder,
it'll make your muscles big.
Like it'll help you get big muscles.
Um,
but no,
like if you take your favorite supplement,
which is steak,
just eat normal.
You know,
and if you're working out,
you're going to eat a little bit more.
That's how you get big muscles work out good and have the correct workout for
muscles.
We did a different kind of workout and if you want to,
you know,
get conditioning or something like that and then eat enough,
that's what you gotta do and eat right after you work out.
I know you you to do that too.
I think.
No actually I think I don't,
you go in somebody actually somebody put on Twitter the debt I was right.
There's like some about you're not going to foster own release or HGH or is
there some kind of something happened in your system?
We'll research that one again.
Yeah.
I don't want to have an uneducated argument right now at all.
So
Joe Rogan and them call it bro Science [inaudible] science road right now.
That would be wrong.
But yes,
to answer the question,
supplements
output,
that's like an everyday supplement to Alpha brain by the way.
Um,
and then the pre workout and oh no problem.
Shroom tech.
And I've been taking,
even before we started this podcast I took shoot no gun.
I remember you getting all fired up for the shoot tech.
Yeah.
Cause cause he gave you the cardio Jude when Miss.
So we have to kind of explain to people that,
you know,
we need more.
I'm not in,
you know,
I'm just saying echo in the past,
I think it's safe to say I don't feel uncomfortable by saying there was a little
bit of a cardio deficits that would be reached very quick Echo Charles on the
mats.
So being tired was more of an issue for me.
Like dealing with being tired,
you know,
certain people will get tired but they just don't care.
Like Dan Henderson,
like you'll get tired but he,
he'll just keep fighting it.
See I didn't have that.
No,
it was the opposite.
So yeah.
So I,
so when I take the shroom tech sport,
you could feel it.
I can feel it.
I can feel like it's like almost like you'd expect to get more tired than you
really are.
That's how I felt.
Yeah,
I was taking that before.
But that's in specific cases only with Jujitsu.
Like if I'm doing like conditioning,
like now,
like a metcon or something,
I won't take it because you don't want to give yourself the extra.
And it seems like if I'm trading just for conditioning it's kind of like I want
the turbo for the mats.
Yeah.
Heck yeah.
But yeah.
Yeah,
that's it.
That's all the supplements right there.
I will take the Krill oil though for sure cause that's gonna help me.
Last question Jocko.
I would enjoy hearing your
thoughts on leading others to a strong finish in both a deployment and in the
civilian life.
This is,
this is something that I saw.
Yeah,
in combat.
Even though my first deployment to Iraq and it's something that I try to train
out of people and that was a tendency to relax once a target with secure or the
vehicles were loaded and we were leaving the target area,
people would have a tendency to let their guard down,
but you can't let your guard down then
or ever really can.
In training.
When I was running training,
we always hit the platoons hard on target,
but we always,
we always hit him even a harder after they left the target.
Once they were patrolling back to base and their mind,
they'd already gone home and then turned off.
And that's when we bring it to him.
We hate him from multiple angles with all kinds of mayhem
because I wanted to instill into them.
I wanted to instill that attitude,
the muscle memory
to always keep going and always stay focused a cause.
That's,
that's the mentality that you have to have is that it's never finished.
Okay?
It is never finished.
You always have to do more.
Another mission,
another task,
another goal,
and have that attitude that the enemy is always watching and waiting and
looking,
looking and studying you for that moment of weakness,
looking for you to exhale,
put your weapon down and close your eyes.
That's when they attack.
So my rule is don't be finished.
Be Starting,
be alert,
be ready,
be attacking.
Be Relentless
at the enemy.
Stop.
Let the enemy rest.
Let the enemy finish,
but you
don't finish.
Don't stop.
Don't rest until enemy is completely
destroyed.
And even then,
even then
when the enemy's gone,
that's when you turn that focus inward on yourself and you take the opportunity
not to rest.
But as always,
you take that opportunity to make yourself better,
faster,
smarter,
stronger.
And with those goals,
nothing
is it ever finished.
Okay.
So thanks to everybody
tuning into the podcast and listening to it.
Thanks for subscribing and reviewing and spreading the word,
telling other people about the podcast.
Thanks to [inaudible] dot com for the support.
And what do we got with amazon.com for support?
Um,
the,
I put a little link can be,
again,
both the websites where you can,
um,
like if you shop at Amazon,
it's like an affiliate.
It's like just like a way to support this podcast.
If you shop on Amazon,
you click through there first and um,
it kind of gives us a referral kind of fee,
you know,
all these books that people are buying from the podcast.
Yeah.
That's awesome.
So yeah,
if you click through the website,
you get,
you know,
we,
we'll get like a little percentage or whatever.
It's like a referral thing.
Um,
and your book is actually on,
on there as well.
Extreme ownership.
Nice.
I like that.
But yeah,
that's it.
That's a good way.
Good deal.
Cool.
Couple of ways to support the podcast and the Onnit stuff is pretty obvious when
you go on there,
you can click on there,
click on that link to if you're going to show if you're going to get alpha brain
or or or a shroom tech or or Krill oil or whatever,
whatever,
all the dope stuff on there.
But um,
if you click through there,
you'll get the 10% off.
Oh Nice.
Or just go to on it on it.
O n n I t.com/jocko same thing.
Got It.
And
appreciate all that support from everybody.
There's a,
I know echo who's running this thing,
he's paying for server costs and all this stuff Quitman and whatnot.
Me,
I'm just showing up and talking so appreciate the support.
So echoes not common out of pocket for the Gig.
If you want to connect with us,
she want to continue these conversations.
You want to ask questions and we got some great questions tonight.
For sure.
Agree.
If you want to know what we're up to,
you can connect to us through the interwebs on Twitter.
I'm at Jocko Willink and of course Echo Charles is at Echo Charles and I'm going
to start a Facebook page,
I think,
and Echo Charles is going to start a Facebook page,
Jocko podcast,
Facebook page.
That'll be good.
I think
Andy,
thanks for leaving reviews and the podcast on iTunes.
That's kind of how,
another way that the word gets spread and of the book,
extreme ownership on amazon.com that also helps us.
And finally,
if you really want to help me get out there in the world,
in your car,
in the train,
at your apartment,
at your house where every you are at work or at play,
get out there and get after it.
So until next time,
this is Jocko and echo
out.